The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [7]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z3Wf7tYlt54
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Good afternoon. This afternoon. Yeah. Before we start the teaching again, correct your motivation. Um the main topics presented in this 37 practice text is about relative and ultimate bodhicitta. And up until now we have profound explanation of relative bodhicitta which is taken on the suffering of others exchanging yourself with others and correct engaging in um what do you post post meditation practice etc. As you know the essence of relative bodhic jetta is love and kindness, compassion uh and patience. Uh practice and related bodhic jetta involves cultivating the intention to achieve liberation for the benefit of uh all beings. and actively engaging in compassionate actions. So it has two main aspects aspiration and action relative bodhichata. Aspiration and action bodhichata relative. Now here we are going to start with the with teachings on ultimate bodhicitta. Okay that is the 22nd verse explains the practice of ultimate bodhicitta. It says, "All appearance are your own mind and mind itself self permanently transcending all mental fabrications. Knowing this in the face of dualistic notion of subject and object and not engaging is the practice of bodhic satta. So the question is why is this ultimate nature called bodhicitta? The reason is that when you recognize this ultimate nature of the mind, you will automatically uh develop a great compassion for all beings. Because you will see that all those who lack this realization have the same nature as you. And you will see their suffering from disturbing emotions that results from not knowing their true nature, the ultimate nature mind. You will then automatically develop great compassion for them even though they have this great nature we call Buddha nature right but they don't know they don't understand they don't recognize the nature mind and then they're suffering from disturbing emotions that result from not knowing their true nature. So then you can see through your wisdom then you develop great compassion. That's why it's called ultimate bodhicitta. The definition of bodhic jetta is both compassion and wisdom. Right? The essence of relative bodhic jetta is compassion. The essence of ultimate bodhic jetta is wisdom. So that's why relative and ultimate bodhic jetta is inseparable. So the first line here all appearances are your own mind it means things you your your eyes see things your ear hear right as well as all the thoughts feelings and uh um experience and dreams that appears in your mind. Buddhism believe mind is creator. Your mind is creator. We normally believe um all this you know thoughts, feelings and all this these things truly exist. Therefore we create attachment um and all the other emotions. So the first first step in understanding the nature of reality is to realize that all these appearances are nothing other than your mind. First step. The second step in in in understanding the nature of reality is to realize that mind is not anything other than emptiness. If you fully realize these two points, then you will develop the wisdom which relies the true nature of phenomena. And once you have the ability to recognize the empty nature of mind, then your attachment um or whatever will not arise when you see something beautiful and your anger will not develop whenever it come you know it come across anything that is unpleasant. So whenever a thought arise recognize it as being empty and then that thought will immediately lose its power and will not generate attachment, anger all this There's no way we will ever get rid of attachment and anger as long as we keep believing that they truly exist. The more we attempt to reject the external things, the more they will come back at us. So it is important to recognize the empty nature of your thoughts and then simply allowing them to dissolve into their nature. And teach it says you know looking looking at the mind there is nothing to seeing nothing you see the nature the essence of all the Buddha. told if we can't tame our own mind, there's nothing to tame outside of us. And this is Buddhist belief, right? So from an ultimate bodhicitta perspective, all these appearances of um disturbing emotions, thoughts and so forth are not our main problem. It's not it's not the appearances uh themselves that bind us. But it is the disturbing emotions and thoughts that we create that cause us to remain in samsara and prevent us from achieving liberation. Uh so the second line says mind itself primordally transcend all mental fabrications. Some practitioners may have believed that when you realize the nature of the mind then at that point the mind becomes transcendent. But that is not the case. The mind's nature itself is totally beyond beyond change. So it cannot be improved by realization. If you examine the mind in your meditation, you will recognize that the objects of attachment and anger have no true existence. And through ultimate bodhicitta meditation, you will be able to overcome creating cause of samsara through attachment and anger. And everything that appears you know pure or impure exists relatively because of mind and and the relative uh uh vision of the mind. All this everything that appears you know um pure impure all this relatively exist because of mind right but we do not find all existence if we search for it and uh ultimate sense Okay, I'm not going to talk about how to search for this thing. Now, the third line says dualistic notion of subject and object. Are you looking at the text? Okay. Dualistic notion of subject and object. It refers to perceived and perceiver, right? The perceived is the outer perceived object and the perceiver is the inner perceiving mind. It is just like a dream in which um objects seem to arise yet nothing that appears has any true existence. So if the outer perceived object is just like a dream appearance then what can we say about the inner perceiving mind? The text says that the mind itself transcend transcends all mental fabrications. With this recognition we can give up clinging to dualistic appearances. Only then we will be able to accomplish this practice. So meditating on ultimate bodhicitta, letting the mind become peaceful and staying in a meditative state of stillness, free from thoughts and then recognizing the empty nature mind within that state of calm is the essence of meditation practice. Do you understand this is a little bit don't worry as long as long as you focus on relative bodhic jetta aspiration and action um you will understand the ultimate bodhicitta sooner or later. Now the the next verse When you encounter objects that please your mind though they appear beautiful like rainbows in the summertime. Does rainbow appears winter time? Oh, you're right. Sundog that's not rainbow. Do you know how many colors of rainbow? Wrong. Okay. Okay. I don't know. Beautiful like rainbows in the summertime. Oh, that's your mind. Okay. It says that beautiful like rainbows in the summertime, not regarding them as real and giving up attachment to them is the practice of bodhic sattva. Okay. the the the 22nd verse above was an explanation of the um meditation practice associated with ultimate bodhicitta. Right? This verse um speaks of how we apply an understanding of emptiness towards uh beautiful objects during uh kind of the past meditation and how we learn to properly relate it to experience of pleasant and unpleasant objects which if not practiced properly will create attachment or anger. Right? So when we see, hear, smell or taste something beautiful, right away we think, "Wow, this is a beautiful and then become attached to it. But here the text says when you encounter objects that please your mind see them like rainbow in the summertime. See, rainbow is vivid and um captivating but intangible. Right? Similarly, objects or experiences that bring um pleasure in life are often beyond our control. Whatever it is that that that you are perceiving is in that sense beautiful and desirable just like a rainbow. It's totally uh it's totally insubstantial. um insubstantial and um this is true of many other objects of attachment including people, thoughts and um ideas. So anything we experience as an experience and its nature has not has has no true existence. Therefore it says here giving up or give up attachment to them. Again, it doesn't mean denying their existence in an actual sense, but rather recognizing that their appearing beauty is just temporary just like rainbow. And by seeing them as a temporary thing um then we can reduce the uh tendency to cleaning um these objects. So this is how bodhic sattvas um deal with um uh with external things either pleasant or unpleasant and how they practice um nonattachment when they see uh something beautiful. You can see something beautiful but it says give up attachment to when you see something beautiful. So bodhic sattas training themselves uh to see them as just like rainbow um which uh you know displays beauty but uh have no inner value. So when you see something beautiful, attractive but understand its true nature. It doesn't stop you seeing the beautiful things but stop strong attachment to it. So if you have realized the true nature of something first, it makes big difference to your um your um way of way of dealing with it. So when you realize emptiness, this does not mean that you reject all appearances, right? But its purpose is to stop this um exaggeration of uh the object by ignorance when uh it appears to your mind. So you can stop uh stone attachment and anger and make your mind totally free. And now the next verse um [Music] deals with the situation of when you encounter something unpleasant. This verse deals with something that you see beautiful things. Right? So 24th All forms of suffering are like the death of a child in a dream. To take such delusion is real. How exa exhausting. Thus when encountering difficult circumstances seeing them as delusions is the practice of bodhicattvas. What is the the bottom line? The the point is we have to free our mind either through practice through relative bodhicitta or ultimate bodhicitta. So this verse deals with when we meet difficult situations. Of course we do encounter lots of uh lots of um pleasant things as well as unpleasant things. All right. So when things go well there is a there is a tendency to feel arrogance and look down on others and when things go poorly there is a self uh criticism right criticism and looking down on yourself. So both of which cause suffering for yourself and those around you. So this is part of the uh human condition I say influenced by ego. So it is important not to not to treat this this experience both pleasant and unpleasant as a as a substantial. Um and both you know pride and self-doubt are temporary. So do not let either control your inner peace and cause you to disrespect yourself or others. So it says here all forms of suffering are like the death of a child in a dream. So in your dream for example, your child dies and you go through a lot of suffering from losing your child. But when you wake up, you realize that there was no child there in the first place. So why were you so upset about the child dying? Similarly, so this teaching suggests that the suffering you experience in your life feels overwhelming and real in the moment and harms you. But ultimately it is it is uh it is in in insubstantial when you view it from the perspective of ultimate truth. So then it says to take such delusions as real. How exhausting it means exhaustion. Huh? It means when we to take such delusions are real. How exhausted? It means when we uh fixate it on our suffering as something something real something solid and believe it to to be to be truth. We exhaust ourselves all the time by frustration, fear, sadness, unhappiness. Right? So for bodhic sattvas, their practice is not about uh not about denying suffering. Instead, it's about recognizing that suffering arise from our perception, attachment, and mistaken view of mistaken views of life. And by understanding that difficulties are like illusion or dreams, bodhic sattvas can face challenges. And at this moment we may not have capacities like bodhic sattas do but at least my teachers always say we should reflect every morning how lucky I am to be alive. And whoever sees me, hears me, touches me, dreams of me, may that be the complete cause of their happiness. Morning. And during the post meditation meditation section in ordinary life they say we should try to engage in the practice of the six perfections six paramas try to be generous uh focus on discipline be patient and so forth for the purpose of achieving enlightenment for all living beings. And on top of that, if you are able to meditate on ultimate bodhicitta, you will be able to understand the reality of suffering. So therefore even if you suffer your suffering will be like the death of your child in your dream. It appears but it has no existence. It's just a dream. So when you wake up the dream ends. This is how bodhic sattas handle their emotions when they are faced with either you know joy or unhappiness. Body surface of course go through very difficult lives and challenges but they they really know how to handle so then it doesn't matter. Okay. 25th. Okay. It says for enlightenment for enlightenment if it is necessary to sacrifice even your body then what need is there to mention external objects thus practicing generosity without hope of what reciprocation or positive result is the practice of bodhic satta l means reciprocation n is um positive result. Okay, keep that in mind. Uh so from here the um this is the sixth section of the text. uh W to talks about how to practice the six perfection Sanskrit six paramas right which is uh part of the uh cultivation of both relative and ultimate bodhic chitta uh of the bodhic surface. So the six the sixth are the um uh uh what do you call it? Um the the the principle practice in which bodhic sattvas engage when they practice action bodhicitta. So first we start with uh generosity. It says for enlightenment if it necessary to sacrifice even your even your body. So if it if it is necessary to sacrifice even your own body for enlightenment you should. it is valuable. Then of course giving up external possessions um should not even be a question. So if it is our intention to achieve Buddhahood the enlightenment then there is no question that we must be prepared to be um generous. Uh this shows that true spiritual pra practice uh requires a deep level of detachment and um selflessness. The practice of generosity is one of the six perfections in the bodhic sattva path. Right? So it says practice and generosity without hope and reciprocation on positive result. This is a very special motivation. In Buddhism, true um generosity is not about expecting or receiving, you know, recognition or rewards or positive karmic benefits, nothing like that, right? But it is about giving purely out of compassion and for the benefit of others. So gener pure paramuta pure generosity it has to be done without any concern for a reward of any kind of to to the giver. The bodhic sattas want to help all beings. So they cultivate this kind of giving without attachment. So this teaching encourages us to be uh generous in in everyday life not just only with you know for example with money or possessions but with with your kindness or with your time and effort uh without expecting anything in return. So true generosity arises from a mind free from attachment and ego. And the essence of generosity is as Shandanda Dewa says simply the intention of giving away anything based on the realization of nonattachment and the realization of the suffering of others. That's all. Therefore the essence of the perfection of generosity is about realization of nonattachment. That's that no more. Then 26th verse. [Music] If discipline is lacking, you cannot even benefit yourself. Then your wish to benefit other is laughable. Thus maintaining discipline free of desire for worldly existence is the practice bodhic sattvas. In Buddhism, discipline is one of the fundamental foundations for mental clarity and ethical conduct. So it says here if discipline is lacking, you cannot even benefit yourself. Then your wish to benefit others is laughable. in Tibetan laughable. So if we are uh undisiplined right undisiplined um our efforts to help others and ourselves will be will be be harmful. So we have to constantly remember uh to um to arouse body bodhic mind for our actions. If we wish to help others um we it says we must first you know cultivate self-disipline and um inner uh strength. The bodhic sattas practice discipline um not for personal gain but out of u a deep commitment uh to the well-being of uh all sentient beings. It's so important. Discipline comes when we observe our thinking and observe our action. It comes it with the mindfulness discipline that is absolutely necessary in our daily life. So discipline is um constantly watching with a sense of awareness of our own reactions. And and um and this um constant watching brings great discipline. Without discipline teacher say you know we will not be able to guide people to the right place and with discipline we can reduce negative thoughts, negative words, negative conduct. negative uh motivation and so on. So discipline is necessary in our daily lives. It brings not only uh long-term spiritual result but also gives meaning to this life. So when we talk, eat uh with discipline, mindfulness, then there is no chance to harm others, make others unhappy with discipline. Right? So that's the action bodhicitta. Practice action bodhicitta. Okay, that's a that's second parameter.