The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [4]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WZ3NLjZtVho
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Okay, welcome back. Now we are on the seventh verse of the the last preliminary practice, right? It says, bound themselves in the prison of samsara. What worldly protectors have the ability to protect you? Question mark. Therefore, seeking refuge in those who do not deceive the three jewels is the practice of bodhicattas. So this seventh verse talks about the importance of seeking true refuge in the three jewels. Um so taking refuge is the seven the preliminary practice here. Um and the first line here bound themselves in the prison of samsara. what worldly protect what worldly protectors have the ability to protect you. This line is um primarily directed to those born in Tibet. Uh many Tibetans take um worship in local sort of how do I say local gods associate with the beautiful mountains or special trees or special water where Naga kins you know live and so forth. So these local gods are worldly. We call world not we don't call gods but we call worldly protectors. So these worldly protectors are spirits who are still part of samsara part of samsara that's why we call worldly protectors um who have not attained liberation enlightenment so they are unable to protect you and un they're um un unreliable sources of protection. So worldly protectors cannot offer the true refuge that leads to uh liberation from the suffering of samsara. So there are also some religions that have the practice of u animal sacrifices to sort of gain success. They believe that uh the bigger the sacrifice, the larger the animal, the better it will burn. lack and success. So those kind of protectors who um rely on harmful practices are not true refuge. So in Buddhism, true protectors uh would never encourage actions that harm others. They guide others towards liberation through generosity, compassion, wisdom, nonharm. So taking refuge is an essential foundation of all Buddhist teachings because you know in our lives there are a lot of obstacles, a lot of uh confusion and um a great deal of um suffering and unhappiness. So the reason going for refuge is uh essential is we need some sort of reliable method that will lead to the enlightenment. um and uh the um uh the uh elimination of um all these obstacles um in our lives. So going for refuge in the three jewels means accepting the Buddha as our teacher, Dharma as our path, Sana as our friends. So that's enough. We just rely on Buddha as our teacher, as our deity, as our everything. And then dharma is just a really clear path. And then in order to journey on that path, we need some good friend so that when we have a hard time, they can help us. That's all we need. No other everything. Every everything includes Buddha Dharma Sana. Right? So this seven this is the seven seventh preliminary practice which is taking refuge in three jewels purely from your bottom of your heart. So you don't need worldly protectors. You don't need anything else. Just three jewels. How simple. Okay, that's easy. So I don't have to explain all. Now the next eighth verse is the Buddha taught that all the unbearable suffering of bad rebirths is the result of negative karma. Thus even at the risk of your life never committing negative actions is the practice of bodhic sattas. So now here we finished the seven topics of the preliminary section. Now from here on is the main teaching section of the the text. Uh this section is again divided into three sections. The path for lesser individual, the path for the middle individual and the path for greater individual. So the path for the lesser level individual is um discussed in this verse which is negative actions bring unhappiness into their life or in other words karma right karma and effect. The focus of this level of the path is the realization that what we do in this life will cause the experience of our future lives. So we should never commit negative actions even at the risk of our lives. So when we talk about the power of cause and karma, if we do not value causing karma, cause and effect, our actions of body, speech and mind will lack discipline. The Buddha taught that the unbearable suffering of this life is the result of wrongdoing in the past. Past in this life or past in past life. Right? So therefore we should never commit negative actions. If we don't believe in the principle of cause and effect then we will continue to engage in negative actions. So therefore this verse is uh is a reminder for us to deeply believe in cause and effect cause and karma right so that we will not commit negative actions in the future. So this is the first step and one of the most important practice of bodhic sattvas and um um the followers of the bodhicatta path. So the goal of the lesser individual is to avoid experiencing the suffering of samsara. That's why this verse encourages practitioners to avoid harmful actions and believe that cause and result are essential for their own future happiness. It says here even at the risk of your life never commit negative actions. So all the bodhic sattvas in the past treat all these um those who harm them with the practice of patience. Maybe you know we are not there yet but if we practice bodhic chitta uh even if we cannot do the same as the bodhic sattvas we should still be able to understand that we need to eliminate negative actions and we cannot let anger generate in our Mind anger ruins our love and compassion and bodhicitt. Right? And then the next the ninth verse. The pleasure of the three rounds is like dew drops on the tips of grass. Its nature makes it evaporate in a single moment. The internal supreme state of liberation striving for that is the practice of bodhicatt. Um in the last verse we um discussed the importance of um deeply believing in cause and uh result to avoid um falling into samsara. The middle level individuals don't wish to just temporarily free themselves from the suffering of samsara but they wish to achieve complete and lasting sort of lasting um liberation. The path for the middle level individuals is discussed in this this verse. Okay. So this verse reflects on the uh nature of worldly pleasures and the value of striving for liberation. So the pleasure of the three realms is like it says dew drops on tips of grass. The three realms refers to the desire realm, human realm, right? This human realm, desire, the then the form realm we call God's God's realm and then the formless realm. formless realm. This is the also another god god realm but different kinds of gods you know. So this is the this is the highest of the three realms. So in Buddhism only beings who have attained very deep levels of formless meditate uh absorb absorption are reborn here. So don't meditate on shamata alone for your whole life. If you do that you are reborn in this realms. While in this state you are not experiencing suffering but you also do not have liberation. This state is um impermanent and the ground of the afflictions is still there and can be experienced again once you come out of this uh meditative state. So if you remember in Buddha's life before he become enlightened uh he reached this state of meditation but he knew one of his his teacher said oh you are there now I remember in the sutra I said you know this teach his teacher say I'm very old now. So I'm going to die. So you should keep my position and you are there no more. And Buddha meditate and meditate and no this is this is not liberation. And Buddha knew it wasn't complete liberation. So he continued his journey until attend enlightenment. Yeah. If you meditate only shamata alone this is a problem. One time Ken Panzo said you know one of the the first anom which is uh he let you meditate shamata for seven years shamata only shamata for seven years then when you're done then he will give you the next meditation said panzo said he know he knows that how long how long you have like your life. So he said I don't know. So I will not let you meditate only and meditate shamata alone for 7 years. If you died while you're meditating shamata you're going to reborn this kind of realms form for form form realm or form list realm. It's hard to say this verse words. So you know say I don't know how much you have time. So I will give you you should practice shamata like 3 months and then we'll go to next. Anyway, so this verse says the pleasure of the three realms is like a dew drops on tips of grass. That means happiness of the three realms is impermanent. It doesn't last very long. It's like a dew drops on the tip of grass, right? Meaning, you know, it it it disappears very quickly when the sun comes out. Done. So as long as we take rebirth based on the three negative emotions, there's no everlasting happiness according to Buddhism, you know. So if we look for happiness and joy based on attachment and desire, that type of joy and pleasure is temporary because when we expect happiness out of attachment and pleasures, we will end up uh um disappointed. So all worldly pleasures are you know interesting in the beginning but um at the end they bring unhappiness. So this is like if we have uh sort of teachers say like very itchy skin, scratching the skin brings temporarily happiness, relief, right? But at the end it gets worse. So the Buddha and Bodhi sattas do not expect happiness out of worldly pleasures. The bottom line is our happiness is under the control of other forces. So we really don't own that happiness until we achieve the everlasting happiness of um enlightenment. There is a beautiful tasure song by Kimu. I say it says there is no Buddha who possess attachment. Listen carefully. There is no Buddha who possess attachment. Understand? Okay. However, that attachment itself is the Buddha. What? Yep. [Music] There is no Buddha who possess attachment. However, that attachment itself is the Buddha. So when you think about it meaning it seems like a contradiction at first but if you recognize the nature of your afflictions that is no different than the Buddha. So human life is relatively free and happy compared with uh sort of other realms but still does not give us complete freedom and confidence. So we have pleasures and happy moments but if we expect too much and are attached to those pleasures we will suffer. It's because this life is still not free from suffering. Even if we have been born as a human being have this a precious life. So in this verse you know the worldly enjoyments are pleasurable in the beginning but um as time goes on they become an sort of increasing source of worries and they bring a lot of u unhappiness. So teachers say that it's like um it's like uh wrapping a piece of wet leather around your your wrist. It's fine at first, right? But as the leather dries and shrinks, it tightens painfully. So worldly pleasure is like that. So the message in this verse is not to put your hope in trying to achieve happiness within samsara but to put your efforts into achieving unchanging happiness which in Buddhism is the changeless state of enlightenment liberation. Okay, now the next 10th verse. [Music] Y from beginning this time your mothers have cherished you. If they now suffer, what good is your own happiness? Thus for the sake of liberating limit limitless sentient beings generating bodhicitta is the practice of bodhic sattvas. This section and verse is on the practice of the path for great level of individuals or those engaged in the practice of Mahayana. Remember there are three verses lesser individual middle individual. This is the um greatest level of individual because their motivation for practice is is I will not only save myself but I will protect all beings. I will help all beings achieve a state of everlasting happiness because each and every being has the desire to be happy. But for the most part, no one really knows how to achieve genuine happiness. because of that even if we succeed in achieving a temporary state of happiness that turns into suffering. So if we recognize this basic situation of life then through this recognition we will begin to uh create the actual heartfelt desire to help each other. So that kind of uh awakening of the wish for the happiness of others is the beginning of what is called bodhicitta. Okay. This bodhicitta is the most important aspect of the training of bodhic sattvas. If bodhicitta is present that person is called the bodhic sattva right. The 37 practice of bodhic sattvas primarily focus on bodhicitta and the bodhic sattva path. So from here on he talks about bodhicitta. Because now we are on the greatest level of individual path and practice. So if we don't reflect on bodhicitta, there will be no way to practice the Mahayana uh Buddhism purely. Now from where does bodhichata arise? It arises from the heart of benefiting others. So the first two lines of this verse explain the interconnectedness of all beings and the fundamental reason why it is important to generate bodhicitta. So how should we repay kindness of mothers? Parents I mean mother means parents. Okay. This situation creates the motivation and desire to benefit all beings. So bodhic chitta is definitely about changing our mental attitude. In Tibetan we say sim simit sim means mind kit means kit means extent. make bigger. So we need to extend our mind because the room in our mind is sometimes so small right that even we ourselves cannot even be there. So we must expand our mind by understanding how important happiness is for all sentient beings. So we have to practice bodhicitta to extend or expand our mind. But before practicing, we must know how important happiness is for all sentient beings. Not not only for ourselves but all sentient beings. That's that's that's the main thing. Once you understand that bodhicitta will come. So in Buddhism the best way to take care of yourself is uh to take care of others. Buddha believes that. Shanda says the Buddha became Buddha by taking care of others. to understand that is clearly how it is cultivating profound compassion and wisdom for the benefit of all beings. Right? What is both characteristic of bodhicitta? Two, wisdom and compassion. That's what we call bodhicitta. So cultivating profound compassion, profound wisdom for the benefit of all beings. And that long journey of sort of caring for others is what made him become a Buddha. So the desire to benefit all beings is an um expression of uh compassion. Generating bodhicitta involves cultivating a heartfelt wish to achieve liberation for all mother sentient beings. Okay. So that's the meaning of this verse. Now the next 11th verse is this is very easy. All suffering comes from the wish for your own happiness. The perfect Buddhas are born from the intention to benefit others. Thus, exchanging your own happiness for the suffering of others is the practice of body satas. Oh, beautiful. This verse is related to the path of the bodhic satta, right? someone who seeks liberation not just for themselves but for the benefit of all beings. So this verse means that usually um whatever we say um we are only thinking about our own happiness. Is that true? All the time we don't really care whether others are happy or not. most you know um through this sort of selfish intention we create negative um accumulations. It's like it's like snow in winter time. snow falling continuously without any interruption and this continues to accumulate very thick snow right and it prevent beautiful things from growing in the ground. So bodhicitta bodhic sattvas believe that self centered desire for personal happiness um often lead to unhappiness and uh shanda said that you should regard all others like yourself and regard yourself and the situation of others. So this verse deals with uh how bodhicitta is cultivated in your meditation practice. So what we need to do at the present moment is experience a total change of attitude. So we must realize as long as we are trying to achieve our own happiness regardless of what we do to accomplish this uh it will never work if we harm others for our own happiness. So the cause of our own happiness is to benefit others. Whoever generates the heart of benefiting others can become a bodhic satta because this this um heart of bene benefiting other is heart of u bodhic sattvas. So here it says exchange your own happiness for the suffering of others. This doesn't you know literally mean taking on others suffering or abandoning all your personal wellbe. Instead it refers to mental exchange. Okay. It's like a tonlin meditation. Do you understand? Giving taken meditation. Your mental exchange. Visualize taking in the suffering of others and giving them your um own joy, peace, happiness. So through this sort of method, through this training uh mental exchange practitioners will be able to get rid of selfishness and cling into personal desires. So how do we develop the ability to do this exchange? So begin by visualizing according to the instructions on toning. Okay. The practice of uh uh giving and taking, right? Taking and giving meditation is a practice uh to increase your love and compassion. Exchanging self and others doesn't mean I become you, you become me or I put you in my house and give everything to you and I become a homeless person. Not like that, right? It means instead of uh working just for my own benefit, I know exchange that and work for the benefit of others. Much to said uh some another his teaching if you don't take the suffering of all beings on your shoulders what's the use of receiving all the Mahayana teachings. So in short bodhichata is the source of all happiness. So verses 10 and 11 instruct us on ways to generate this powerful bodhicitta mind. Okay, [Music] just you should study um go back and think about these verses again. Now the next verse is even if someone driven by great desire steals all your wealth or incite someone else to steal it. dedicating to this person your body possessions and all your virtues of the three times is the practice of bodhic sattas. Now a little bit um difficult to you know this is difficult to practice that's why this is called the greatest level of individuals practice. This is difficult to practice if it really happens to us, right? Because normally when someone steals something from us, uh we become very upset, angry, but this verse instruct us to do the opposite. So you might think when you hear this verse, are you kidding? That's not fair. It's impossible. But if this happened to bodhic sattas, they're they're not only to let the person get away with it. But um they can dedicate everything to that person. It happened. If you are a great bodhic sattva and someone wants to take your life, you can give it unconditionally. That's because of a real a real bodhic satta can see this person lost control of their mind and out of anger harm others. So bodhic sattas feel great compassion for that person that bodhic sattas have the capacity to see the situation as in an opportunity to practice patience generosity and compassion. Oh, this is a good opportunity to practice to to develop my bodhic jetta. There are many stories of how people came to the dharma as a result of u having been harmed by others like you know malaria is a great example. Malariba. You know Malaria? Okay. He left his home and practiced with his teacher for many years, right? And then one night he had a very emotional dream about his mother. In the morning he wanted to see his teacher. He was in the cave practicing but wanted to ask his teacher to go home. And then when he saw his teacher in the morning his teacher Marbaloa was um sleeping and there was a sun shining on his teacher's head. from the windows, right? And when he woke up, he asked him, "I can I go home? I had this vivid dream last night and I really want to see my mother." And then his teacher said, "You see, when you came here, I was sleeping. That means we will not see each other after you go home. But the good thing is there was a sunlight on my head that means your practice will go well and you will be my lineage holder. So he said yes you can go home but I don't think you will see your mother. uh everything is impermanent. So he left and when he arrived home everything was gone everything. And his mother had died. Then maybe you know this there's a beautiful emotional kind of song. He sung uh he sang a song about impermanence. something like um when the house is there the honor is gone. When the honor um then when the honor comes back the house is falling apart. Even though both are together meaning the honor and house are together there is no essence only practicing the dharma is meaningful. Um when mother was alive son is gone. The son when son comes back the mother died even though both are together there is no essence only practicing the dharma is meaning something like that he sounds beautiful things and then his sister also wonder right the raja know so when his sister when he sounds like yeah when sister was there The brother is gone. The brother comes back his the sister is no longer there. Even though both are together, what is the essence? Only practicing the dharma is meaningful. So then he just saying that and then he went back to the cave and meditate you know and then also after that he met his aunt and uncle who destroyed his families right wealth because they took everything so this time they also wanted uh Malaria's farm they they have a farm. Uh you can go there still that all is there in Tibet and you know Meriva give his farm to his uncle and aunt and um dedicated instead of getting angry. So if this happened to us, we may not have the capacity to handle it in such a way. But we as as Mahayana practitioners should be able to handle sim similar kind of smaller situations, right? Anyway, body suffers are amazing. Is it What makes your body suffer? Body cha. Never forget that.