The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [10]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2WKsyAkGp88
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Okay. 34th verse it says harsh words disturb the minds of others cause deterioration in a bodhic surface conduct. Thus giving of harsh words which are unpleasant to others is the practice of bodhic sattas. This verse is very important to practice, right? It deals with the importance of skillful speech and the practice of bodhic sattvas. It says harsh words disturb the minds of others. this there are several different ways we can speak harshly. We can directly say something harmful, hurtful to someone or another way is to say something behind someone's back, right? That will get back to them um and make them very very unhappy. So harsh words whether speaking out of anger, frustration or carelessness can deeply disturb others mind and harm relationships. Um they are unpleasant to everyone and this problem is very common. So how do we avoid harsh words? Avoiding harsh words requires mindfulness uh in Mahayana Buddhism and also a deep understanding of the impact your speech has on others. Observe your words and the intention behind them. [Music] Sometimes, as I said, right, sometimes we say something, there's not necessarily bad intention, motivation behind, but just we're not mindful. then we say something that's also hurts others. So mindfulness observe um my teacher say you know pause before speaking and ask yourself will these words bring benefit or not bring benefit or harm. Consider how the other person will feel upon hearing your words. Imagine yourself in their place. How would you like to be spoken to? This kind of like exchanging, right? Try to speak with the intention of helping rather than hurting. Harsh words arise from anger, irritation. So learn to recognize and manage these emotions before they manifest uh in speech. practice. Remember as I said practice um silence reflection or step away from situation if needed. Um avoid divisive speech. Don't create conflict or encourage misunderstanding. These all are my teachers say all the time. Remember that words cannot be taken back once spoken. So when feeling angry or frustrated, my teacher always say remain try to remain silent for a moment at least if you can. By integrating this practice into daily life, we can transform our speech into love and kindness. and bodhicitta and to make uh good connections rather than harm. We can think I am a Mahayana Buddhist practitioner. So I must at all times conduct myself um uh kindness, compassionate and subdue my mind and always act in a manner that is uh beneficial and not harmful towards others. If we go against this commitment of not doing or saying things um deliberately to hood others then our practice will diminish. That's why it says cause deterioration in a bodhic sattva's conduct. this verse say right. So for this reason we should give up harsh words that are not pleasing to others especially when someone is in a in a in a um leadership position uh it is very easy to become arrogant. um you know they think you know I can say whatever I want because I'm the person in in power um they believe in me and will follow me no matter what that is irrogant rightly thinking and acting like this uh diminish um our love compassion um and leads to harming others through harsh words, harsh words. So then does that mean that when you are in a leadership position for example you never say things that are unpleasant to other people? No at all. Not at all. Um avoiding harsh words does not mean avoiding difficult conversations. A bodhic sattva or any good leader may sometimes need to say things that are unpleasant for others to hear. But the key is um to do so skillfully um with the right motivation. Um so from your own side you don't have the motivation to hurt others when you speak with a good motivation. Does it mean that you will always be successful in not saying things are unpleasant to others? No. Sometimes people tell us you know things out of kindness but um our ego uh doesn't like to hear those things so we get upset and angry. You may not have any intention to harm when speaking with others. But if you are not mindful, your words may be unpleasant and cause you know cause unintentional harm. So some people are unaware of their um their um habitual arrogance. So their way of speaking comes across as arrogant uh even though they don't recognize it and this can harm others. This is why Buddha always say right mindfulness so important in speech. If you are practicing as a bodhic sattva it doesn't necessarily mean that all you say is pleasant words but all you say should be guided by wisdom and compassion. even if it is difficult for others to hear. So for example, if you are um leader of your there there are many different ways to speak, right? If you are leader of your workers, for example, you need to tell them that um their work is not enough. You don't have to say your work is terrible, right? Instead you can say like oh I noticed some areas where improvement is needed. So let's go over them together. That is good way to tell them, right? You don't have to say, "Oh, you're terrible. You're your work is not enough." That's what we call skillfully speak. If you are a teacher, you need to correct a student mistakes. It's the same thing. You don't have to say, "Oh, you are a bad student." You know, so being a bodhic satta or good leader does not mean avoiding difficult situations, but it means, you know, express them, you know, in a way that helps uh rather than harm. [Music] In our normal life, sometimes harsh words come from reacting too quickly. If we feel upset as I said my teacher say you know if you feel upset step back from the conversation before responding. So I think this verse is important to practice and remember all the time. Now here we have completed the explanation of the different practice of bodhic sattvas uh which consisted of the six paramatas. All right. Now we have here 35th verse which uh discusses how to abandon disturbing emotions. It says when it says one when emotions become habitual they are difficult to get rid of with antidotes. Thus with mindfulness and awareness eliminating them the moment they arise is the practice of bodhic sattas. Here we begin the bodhic satta practice of um eliminating uh disturbing emotions by explaining why they are so difficult to work with. If we let disturbing emotions um cla in Sanskrit right emotion um disturbing emotions become habituated. Then of course they um become stronger and stronger and stronger and stronger and at a certain points disturbing emotions become so strong then even if you apply their um antidote solution it's very very hard to overcome. Therefore, the key to overcome negative emotions is uh uh is uh catching them early. So we should not allow ourselves to get too used to them. A bodhic sattva does not wait for disturbing emotions to grow stronger. Instead they recognize them and let them dissolve at the very moment they arise. Then it easy to abandon them. That is the practice of bodhic satta. It says if you hold a fire in your hand will burn your hand. But if you throw away right away, you can save you can protect your head. Sha Deawa has said that um mental afflictions are like enemies except they are much worse. That means emotions destroy ourselves and destroy also others. When Yeshin soldier, you know who she is? Ring knows. She knows who is who is. &gt;&gt; Oh, there you go. Isaia asked Samboa, "Who is the worst enemy?" Sambawa said, "Negative emotions. So always alert and watch what your mind is doing and think about it. Uh negative emotions will never become our friend under any circumstances, right? they always harm us in this lifetime and also future lives if you believe it. So whatever practice you are doing it has to work as an effective antidote to your negative emotions. So on the positive side, if you can manage to emotion, eliminate them, they cannot come back. As long as you maintain your uh mindfulness and inner awareness. So it says eliminating them the moment they arise. This verse is about the necessity of abandoning the negative emotions as soon as they arise. So it's like if you have a have a a a beautiful beautiful garden that is full of beautiful flowers but if you let in animal come into it what will happen? then it will destroy your beautiful garden. So you have to be mindful and as soon as you see the animal you have to get rid of it right away. So similarly disturbing emotions will get into your mind and will destroy your peaceful mind and uh and your freedom. The longer we allow this this this um clas delusions to take root uh the deeper and longer is get stays there. So for this reason we have uh uh no choice. We have to apply the appropriate antidote uh at the very moment they arise and we have to guard our mind in order to be free from them. And the best time to train and antidotes is when your mind is not uh disturbed and not overwhelmed by delusions. This way when um negative emotions arise, you have had some practice and experience in um utilizing the antidotes to um subdue this negative emotions. Otherwise, it would be difficult to uh start practicing when your mind is in a very um um agitated state. Um but is &gt;&gt; you know um once for example when you get angry at that moment it's so hard difficult to um practice and apply antidotes. Um that time the bast was my teacher said just be silent don't say anything then maybe you can recognize nature mind right there and then you have a room but um yeah that's difficult right when you get angry then Hey, you are May and a practitioners and practice patience. It's so difficult. So that point is just difficult. But before that, you know, just be mindful and think about bodhicitta that will help. Okay. Now the next 36 verse It says in brief wherever you are and whatever you do always examine state of your mind with constant mindfulness awareness benefits. Did Did we say this already? No. Okay. Benefiting others is the practice of bodhic sattas. Okay. 30 36. Huh? &gt;&gt; Similar to 31. I think that's a &gt;&gt; You're right. I'm confused. Yeah. So, yeah, you're right. This verse is a summary of u actually you know this whole whole teaching the whole teaching 37ism practice bodhic sattas. So there are two lessons we have to focus on inward awareness and outward benefit to others uh which are the main practice on the body suffer path. So this verse emphasizes the importance of continued self awareness and the practice of bodhic self path right it says in brief wherever you are what whatever you do examine the mind. So this means um knowing your real intention at all times. There is no special place, special time, special situation required. Whether you are working, um you're resting or talking with many people or alone, always be aware and check and with yourself. This is exactly what the Buddha wanted his followers to do. And then it says here always examine the state of your mind with constant mindfulness and awareness. This is about developing the habit of being present and aware not just on the meditation cushion but all the time. So mindfulness and awareness are essential not only for reducing negative emotions uh anything else but um also for limiting their influence. Right? The main focus of both mindfulness and and awareness is uh the examination of the mind. Um is your mind in a positive state or is your mind in a negative state? The mindfulness is keeping the mind in a place. Awareness is watching what is happening. If everything is done with this two then you will be ready to serve and help others because both your capacity and the path will be there. But action without mindfulness and awareness could be dangerous. So no matter how long you are going to meditate, try to meditate with mindfulness and awareness. These two meditations go with all your um activities including you know like when you meditate of course mindfulness awareness is the key but also like worldly life you know your daytoday life mindfulness awareness we have to think about that and mindfulness and awareness are really useful because they support your actions and they're very easy. I mean once you remember mindfulness awareness, you don't need any like secret initiation empowerment in order to practice mindfulness and awareness don't you? So these practice help you find the best connection within yourself. When you have mindfulness, you are making a connection with everything. Um and then there is no room for other um distractions because you are not separate from what is there. Uh mindfulness is fully being in the present moment and awareness is seeing um the discovery of mindfulness. It is your recognition. So the point in this context is to constantly be able to recognize uh the presence of negative thoughts as well as uh positive qualities in the mind. The reason for doing this is not simply to benefit and protect yourself but to benefit others too. You know as a Mahayana practitioner the ultimate goal and motivation is not just uh self-improvement but it's a uh acting with uh kindness wisdom to benefit others as Kadumba masterba said in the Mahayana there is nothing else to do but benefit beings. So constantly checking and purifying the mind is key in Mahayana uh practice. So keep an eye on the mind at all times. Stay present. Stay kind. Can you say the distinction between um mindfulness and awareness is &gt;&gt; the distinction mindfulness um is fully being in the present moment, right? And awareness is seeing the the sort of discovery, the mindfulness. Oh, you are mindful. You are present. You are there present. But who know who knows like you are in there? That's awareness. &gt;&gt; I think the the teachers explain different ways but I I like explain this way. That's my own experience. Maybe I'm wrong. Don't trust me. Okay. Awareness is is your recognition. Right? This goes when you think about nature mind you will understand. So right did I say in the Mahayana there is nothing else to do but benefit beings. So mindfulness, awareness, let every moment be a chance to grow for the sake of others. In Mahayana Buddhism, everything happens in the present moment and the experience of life moment by moment is very precious. Uh because it is your life. It is our life relative relative life not ultimate life. Relative life is uh is um this is you know everything happening in this this present moment. Then you experience life moment by moment. But if you're thinking about past we're thinking about future that's not your life. not relative life. Ultimate life is always there. So that that help mindfulness awareness bring this um uh how do you call precious time and um good opportunities looking at you. This is your life, right? You're thinking about children, time, that's not who you are. This is our life. So just enjoy. But unfortunately we find it difficult to keep ourself in the present this moment this habit. So therefore mindfulness and awareness are important not only for meditation not only for meditation but for everything. So anyway in summary this whole teaching is whatever actions and dharma practice we do we should do them with the intention of benefiting all beings. So inwardly I think you have to focus on mindfulness and awareness. Outwardly whatever you do should benefit yourself and others positively. That's what this whole teaching the 37 practice bodhic sattva is about. Okay. &gt;&gt; Do you like this teaching? &gt;&gt; Well, good. What? &gt;&gt; 36 versus &gt;&gt; 36. Did I I didn't say 36. Absolutely. You're right. I think I said Always make sure you're mindful and your awareness is there. means in brief whatever you do it for the benefit of others including yourself. That's uh 36 verse. Okay. Now, we're going to stop there and say this long chapter.