The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [2]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=avJCFFZCqzs
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

All right. Now the the the first the first verse of the 37 practice of bodhicatt is heaven. Now attain the freedoms and advantages a great bow so difficult to find in order to free yourself and others from the ocean of samsara. Listening, reflecting and meditating with diligence day and night is the practice of bodhicattvas. Uh so as is it before I said this text contains 37 verses right uh but the the first two verses are not uh not counted uh among the 37. So the first of the 37 practice uh starts right here and this this has um two parts. one uh the first part is the preliminary they call preliminary practice uh which is the practitioner engage in in the practice of the the dharma. Then the second part is an explanation of the parts of the three uh levels of practitioners. Um so the first part has um seven different preliminary practices. Okay. So um the first is recognition of precious human life. Um so much to explains here how to uh engage in this bodhic satta practices so that um they will be able to free themselves and others from um suffering of samsara. So the first line of this verse is about the precious opportunity of being born as a human right as a human. So there are three uh way of understand precious human life. Um the first um identifying its freedoms and advantages, the fortunate. The second understanding the value of such a life and then the third seeing how difficult it is to find. Okay, those three um through contemplating these three we will know how precious it is. Uh in Buddhism we always talk about how precious human life is right. Um so why is being born as a human life considered precious? Why um all sentient beings um hold their lives as precious. All sentient beings, not only humans, but in the teachings only if we engage ourselves in the dharma, dharma practice and if if put effort into into the dharma only then do our lives become a precious. uh that's because um it provides a unique opportunity uh for growth and liberation enlightenment. So heaven a a a human life is a necessary condition for practicing the dharma. Um as a human being we possess this uh precious opportunity to practice the dharma and reduce or eliminate suffering u and the cause of suffering. So this is what makes human life precious. Therefore we need to be careful to not waste it. So much to said the human life is like like a boat and samsara is like an ocean that has to be cross it. Uh if we don't have the boat right it would be quite uh hopeless uh but we have a good one good one. So the only thing we need to do is get inside the boat and and get going. It takes time, right? Sometimes we're tired. Oh, this is too long. It takes time to get the other side. It's just long journey, the side of the ocean, right? So we need to keep going day and night without wasting a moment of uh of our life. Uh that's that. Now the second line of this verse is about the um the uh two benefits that we can achieve through this precious human life. First we can help ourselves eliminate our own suffering from samsara. Second we can also um use our precious human life to help others eliminate their suffering from samsara. So the bodhic sattva's goal is not just a personal um enlightenment liberation but also the liberation of others. Um that's second. Then the third line of this verse is it's it's necessary to practice dharma day and night without distractions. So we need to have some intellectual knowledge as well as experiential knowledge. Intellectual knowledge comes first, right? Before um um before gaining experiential knowledge um this intellectual knowledge, this step is necessary. Right? However, thinking about the teachings alone, just thinking about teaching alone doesn't bring realizations, experience. So, we must put them into practice our daily life. So, we need to rely upon these three uh aspects of practice, listening, reflecting and meditating. Understand? Um so this verse describes the fundamental aspect of the bodhic sattva's practice and using the opportunity of precious human life to engage in dharma activities for the benefit of ourselves and others. So whatever we want to do it is right now in our hands right now. Uh making this life meaningful moment by moment by recognizing this precious human life. This is the reason why uh the practice of precious human life uh is given first all the time in Tibet and the teachings like mind training teachings the bodhic satta remember bodhicara avatara all they talk first they talk about precious human life it's necessary practiced in dharma so now we're done this verse right here it's a good time to take the vows. Um, right? We have a precious human life. So, I'm going to give you the refuge and bodhicattva vows. Uh, since you have a precious human life, uh, and those people who already have taken the vows, um, it's important to renew the vows. Um and um those of you who did not take them yet, uh this is the time to uh take the vows. But if you think uh this is very important, you are not ready to take in them. You don't have to. Okay? Just sit there and you can you can you can you can learning about the vows. What is vows? you know um and uh um just to sit there and you don't have to but if you feel you're ready this is a perfect time since you have a precious human life in order to take refuge body self vows you need precious human life and taking these vows you know helps protect you from harming others and improves faith in Bodhi bodhic chitta that's the reason okay when you take refuge vows you will develop your faith when you take bodhic sattva vows you will learn you will develop bodhic jetta mind uh so that you know uh because of your faith in bodhic jetta uh uh they help and protect you from harming others harming yourself that's the reason that's the the essence Why you need to take this vows? Okay. Atisha says if you want to make progress towards the enlightenment that you are wishing to achieve then you have to take this vows. Uh so um there are um three things you need to do. First you must take refuge in three jewels. uh it is the foundation of all other vows uh and uh foundation of your practice and Buddhism and second you must belong to Mahayana Buddhism and have the aspiration to do the practice of bodhic sattva. Okay. Uh third you must keep the important precept of this vows. Understand three things. Um and the refuge vow is about maintain a pure connection to the three jewels. Okay. And um essence of practice Buddha Dharma um is develop your faith uh your trust and the three jewels that's the bodhic ja and the bodhic satta vow is a commitment to take the mahayana path uh the bodhic sattva's journey uh it's it's a commitment based on the realization of the suffering of all sentient beings And it's a commitment to lead sentient beings to liberation from the suffering of samsara. Um so uh that's the bodhic sattva vow. And today we're going to uh as usual to use this vows ritual according to the tradition of uh uh the patuchi. Uh and this ritual has three uh three parts. Uh the preparation part, the main part and then the conclusion part. The preparation part is when you take these vows um you should have a pure motivation again of of doing it uh for the benefit of others. That's important. That's the preparation. Motivation, right? Pure motivation. I'm going to take bodhis and refuge vows um uh develop my capacity in order to help others. Uh now those of you want to take uh these vows uh here we're going to recite the refuge and bodhichata prayer three times. Um, do we have the Yep, we have um refuge and bodies of racial and refuge bodies of page 42. Are you ready? Great. In the Buddha sabana in the spring assembly I take the refuge into lantern and his chief. May the merit of my generosity and other virtues acts lead to the Buddha for the benefit of all beings in the Buddha dharma and hsey I take refuge until enlightenment achieved may be the inseuge the merit of my generosity of all beings. Okay, that is the preparation part for the vows. Now that we have the main section which is talking um taking the the refuge and bodhic vows. Here you need to remember three things. Your motivation again uh your visualization and your commitment. three things. So your motivation is this right? I'm taking this vows for the benefit of all sentient beings including myself. How simple is that right? And then your visualization is you're requesting the Buddha's bodhicatta's intention for the vows. That means you're going to visualize the Buddha, the bodhic sattvas uh in front of you and take them as as a witness um visualization. Now I'm going to recite the vow Rachel three times. The first you're going to take here refuge vows. Okay? I'm going to recite the the the vow ratio three times. And during the third restitation, it's important to make your commitment. That's what you need to do. It means like you should be thinking that from today until enlightenment is achieved, I am a Buddhist practitioner. So I will keep the Buddha as my teacher, the Dharma is my path, the Sana is my spiritual friend. Uh, with that, okay, I'm going to recite the refuge vow ritual three times. You need to repeat after me um uh three times. Okay. So here if you are ready uh your motivation, your visualization, your commitment, then you have the vows. Okay. Uh I I will recite you repeat after me. Okay. You Buddha and Bodhi sas of the 10 directions and you my teacher think about me. Yes. I named you say your name here. Take from this time until death. The most supreme of all human beings. The Buddha is my refuge. The most supreme of all that is free from desire and dharma. I take refuge. The most supreme of all assemblies in the sana. I take refuge. From this point until death. I ask the teacher to accept me as a lay follower who has faith in the trooper refuge. Okay. Now the second you Buddha and bodhic sattas the 10 directions and you my teacher think about me. I take from this time until death the most supreme of all human beings, the Buddha as my refuge. The most supreme of all that is free from desire and the dharma take refuge. The most supreme of all assemblies in SA I take refuge from this point until death. I asked the teacher to accept me as a lay follower who has faith in refuge. Okay. Now the last you Buddha and bodhic sattvas of the 10 directions and you my teacher think about me. I take from this time until death the most supreme of all human beings. The Buddha is my refuge. The most supreme of all that is free from desire in the dharma I take refuge. The most supreme of all assemblies in the sana I take refuge from this point until death. Ask the teacher to accept me as a lay follower who has faith in the refuge. Okay. Now you received the refuge vow and um the lineage sort of blessings for your refuge vow. Um and um I will um give you a refugee name and a certificate if you want one. um not necessary but just let me know. Um now the next is the bodhicatta vow. There are um many ways to take these vows but today uh again we're going to use the ceremony for taking the bodhicatta vow and the tradition of the uh profound view of nangar juna. uh it means you're going to take the vows of bodhic chhatta uh in aspiration and uh action together right sometimes teachers give you the uh only like aspiration bodhi jetta vow and action bodhi jetta vow separately but we're going to take together today that's the profound of the tradition of the profound of nagar jana um uh uh tradition so take them together. So um now here again you need to request the Buddha's bodhic sattas attention for your bodhic sattva vows uh the same as before and uh it's important you make sure that your motivation is correct for the vow. Uh with that here we need to recite request and prayer this prayer three times. Okay, ready. All you Buddhas and Buddhas in the temple, all you great bodhic sattas on the 10 levels, all you great gurus by the vote, turn your mind towards the near. All you Buddhas in this direction. All you great body sas on the 10 levels. All you great turn your mind towards me. Pray. All you Buddhas glory and the 10 directions. All you great bodhic sattas and the 10 levels. All you great gurus turn your mind toward me. Okay. So when you take the bodhicatta vow it means you follow the same path followed by the past uh bodhicattvas and take the bodhicatta path for the benefit of others uh including yourself. Uh with that motivation and with that commitment we're going to begin the ceremony. Uh and here you need to repeat the vow Rachel three times after me again. And during the third restitation uh at the end of the uh the vow Rachel uh you have received the vow. Uh so now please um repeat the bodhic satta vow Rachel after me three times here. Just as all the Buddhas of the past rose bodhichata and established themselves by stages the training of bodhic sappa just so for the benefit of beings I will arose bodhicetta and likewise I will turn progressively and those practice The second just as all the Buddhas of the past arose bodhicitta and established themselves by stages in the train of bodhic sattva. Just so for the benefit of beings, I will arose both and likewise I will train progressively on in those practice. Just as all the Buddhas of the past arose bodhicitt, they established themselves by stages in the training of bodhic sattvas. Just so for the benefit of beings, I will arose bodhicha and likewise I will train progressively on those practices. All right. Now you have the bodhic sattva vow that comes from the lunage of uh nangjuna which means uh you received both aspiration uh and action bodhicitta the bodhic sattva vows. So um it's important to keep the commitment you made during this uh ceremony today to keep your commitment. Um if the mind has the um refuge and bodhic sattva vows then the body and speech will also um spontaneously adopt positive conduct, positive actions. Okay. So that's why you have to keep the commitment you made during this rich the ceremony today. Now we're done with the uh preparation and the main section of the ratio of the refuge and bodhicatta vows. Uh now the next part is the conclusion which is the cultivation of joy for oneself and joy for others. It means from now on you have became a mahaana Buddhist practitioner. Okay. uh became you uh took both refuge and bodhic sattva vows, right? So you are able to do this because of your precious human life, your uh intelligent, your your um discipline, your commitment. Um so it's it's wonderful. It's wonderful. This is the best and ever something happen in your life. Right? So once you take these vows and keep them as your uh precious um dharma tasure uh you purify a lot of uh uh negative karma and at the same time you accumulate a lot of merit uh which is the best condition for generating faith and bodhicitta. uh in your mind. Therefore, now you're going to recite um cultivation of joy uh for yourself and joy for others. Today my life has become meaningful having well attained this human existence. I have been bringing and Buddha now I do from now on my actions benefit never shall I go just like blame person discovering joy and hypoc today and presents our protectors. I invite all beings in the state of the land in the feast of death and others. All right. Cultivate joy for others. That's that. Now the last thing you need to do is u the mandala offering. Traditionally in Tibetan, you know, when you take refuge bodhisata vows, you uh offering mandela um for sort of receiving this vows. The mandala offering represents everything, right? And it is a sort of a symbolic and a devotional act in Bu uh uh Buddhist practice. So here you uh thankfully offer the mandela to the Buddhas and bodhic sapphas as a gesture of gratitude. Uh and it represents your intention to sort of repay their kindness. So please recite the mandala prayer together uh one time. our homeless body. I offer all of this as a beautiful mandala to be jewels. All right. Mandala. Okay. Now we have um also the um the bodhicetta aspiration prayer. May supreme precious bodhicetta take birth where it has not reason where it has reason when but continue to grow forever more. All right. Now we are done with the uh refuge and bodhis vow. uh but um one more thing I would like to uh let you know is that uh it's important to the uh renew both vows every day after you rece you you have received uh these vows um and you should um um recite the the renewal of the refuge and bodies of vow prayer it's called um a daily practice to renew the bodhic safa. Uh it's it's on the website if you need it this um text. So every morning you should do three prostitutations if you can. Uh and then you recite the renewal of the refuge and bodhis vow prayer in front of uh uh always remember this motivation visualization and commitment. Um so uh you uh uh renew the bodhic your refuge vows in front of the Buddhas and bodhic sappas and just think of all the lineage and uh you should remember the commitments you made today and keep your vows purely um as much as you can. Um the refuge vow uh establish a foundation of faith uh trust and um um expresses your intention to follow Buddhist path and bodhicatta vow expresses your intention to follow the Mahayana path. Not just the Buddhist Buddhist path but especially the Mahayana Buddhist path and is a deeper commitment and altruistic goal of helping others and achieving liberation. Uh so the purpose of taking the refuge vow and bodhic sappa vow is wanting to develop faith and bodhicitta mind. That is the whole point. Okay. So now we need to recite the second chapter of the body uh uh bodhicara. So second chapter you probably know but it's about perforation. Uh so you have to purify all the negative karmmas we have done so that uh you can develop your faith and develop bodhicitta. So that's the reason uh so just uh focus on the if you can't um uh think of all the the meaning of the verses when you recite you don't don't worry but just focus your you know just be mindful and just follow the words and then you recite this is part of our meditation okay so uh restitation not to recite The second chapter, please.