The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [6]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=niGe7EAg2q8
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Welcome back. Now we're going to start with the 18th verse of the 27 practice of body surface. Okay. Although Although immersed in poverty and always disparaged by others plagued. Oh, these are difficult. By serious illness and torment by evil spirits spirits taking on the suffering of living beings without discouragement is the practice of bodhicattvas. Oh, this verse describes a situation where the bodhic sattvas have a lot of difficult circumstances such as um suffering, poverty, um discouragement by others, social rejection, serious illness or torment. by evil spreads as bodhic sattvas they must take those situations onto the bodhic sa path and not let them um diminish the power of their bodhicetta mind. So another thing it says here tormented by evil spirits e evil spirits can be um understood in a in a in a in in a few different ways. Okay. It depends on the context and tradition torture, you know. So here it symbolizes inner staggers such as fear, doubt, anxiety, anger, um jealousy, wrong views, illusions as well as external obstacles such as illness, uh physical suffering, um poverty, worldly desire, laziness. What else? Distractions keep them from focusing on their spiritual goals, right? Um encounters with difficult people who harm their practice and uh and so on so forth. Mahayana Buddhism teachs that all these difficult challenges whether external or internal are again opportunities to uh generate bodhicitta. uh body satas face. Um these difficulties with courage and um transform them into opportunities for their spiritual growth and they would think that I am glad all of this is happening to me not to anybody else. They really think that and this this this happened a lot in Tibet and they really think that they say like oh don't kill this person just kill me. Um so they will be able to bring these challenges onto bodhicatta path even in the face of overwhelming difficulties. The bodhic sattas remain unwavering in their altruism, their commitment uh um regardless of personal suffering or external obstacles whatever that's why they are called bodhic satta right do you know what what bodhic satta mean like they possess an inner strength bodhic satta a courageous actually they Courageous courageous bodhic sattvas courageous unweber in mind that's what bodhic sat and uh never ever discourag it. So this verse also mentions that um to be you know without discouragement is the practice of bodhic sattva. It means that um that our determination has to be strong. Um it's because while we practice bodhicitta, we may face all kinds of circumstances. So we have to be we have to remember um every obstacle encountered along the way uh becomes an um opportunity to practice compassion uh which is is an essential quality for anyone on this path this uh this bodhisa path. So when we are facing difficulties we need to remember dharma practice. Uh if we feel um dharma practice is not useful that would be a sign of discouragement and disappointment. If you view dharma practice as useless when it cannot solve your problems, your obstacles, that is an incorrect view. Okay. Uh we can see all these great practitioners uh went through such difficult lives under different situations, circumstances but they never lost their strength and never sort of become discouraged. That's that's that's why bodhi sattva right. So never change their mind because then also they know how to handle this all different kind of situations. They have a wisdom. Uh now the next 19th verse is though you may be famous and revert by many people and gain wealth like a god of Baharabana. Realizing that worldly fortune has no essence and being without arrogance is the practice of bodhicattas. This verse emphasizes um again detachment and wisdom and the face of worldly success. Worldly people think if we become a wealthy enough we will have power right and we will be able to control everything and I will tell others what to do. This idea is is a big problem for bodhicattas. The bodhicattva path is about uh transcending ego and selfcentered desires. So bodhic surfas recognize that detachment allows you to focus on the well-be of others. Bodhi surfas are not against 100% right worldly success as long as they are not harmful. Being wealthy and famous can be very very beneficial or can be very very harmful. The problem with worldly success is it often leads to negative emotions such as arrogance, selfishness, and attachment. So these negative emotions will destroy your spiritual practice. That's why worldly success can be very harmful if you are a spiritual practitioner. Uh for example, um attachment can create dissatisfaction and anxiety. Arrogance creates the habit of uh um how is looking down on others creates a big separation between yourself and others. So rely on them for happiness can lead to suffering. So this is why many spiritual um teachings emphasize uh finding inner peace rather than um dependent on external worldly success. If wealth and power are used selfishly they can cause harm to others. If a wealthy and famous person remains a humble, generous, compassionate, that can create positive changes and can be very beneficial my opinion. So it says gain wealth like the god of vasharana realizing that worldly fortune has no essence. uh it says this vashraana is traditionally known as the god of wealth right therefore represents the richest person in the universe okay it's because vashana for example owns a thousand times everything that this whole world Yes. Okay. Do you think that's the richest person in the universe? So it says it's just the example. I don't know how much he owns but supposedly you know they said we kne oh his reach is like vashana say that all the time. Um so it says even if you gain wealth like him worldly worldly uh worldly fortune has no essence. You know most people and especially non nonpractitioners think that um this concept that the worldly success doesn't have any sense doesn't make any sense. Right? That's may be correct for temporary um reasons especially for those people who don't believe in any kind of uh spiritual practice that they only focus on worldly success. That's all they care about and that's all they want. Um they would do anything for worldly success, right? They don't care about um the harm they cause. They don't believe in cause and karma. They they they they totally believe that their happiness is about wealth and fame and they think that's you know that um it's important to have a strong attachment to this life and um and worldly success and so on. So if you are not spiritual practitioner then of course worldly success is very very important very very important we're not talking here about that kind of person right that's not our business not our business but we're talking about here is people who are spiritual practitioners so in Buddhism the key is not the wealth or fame itself but the motivation ation and action of individual. So being being wealthy could be as I said you know beneficial could be very harmful for their practice. We're talking about practitioners, not thinking about the non Buddhist or nonpractitioners. For them, of course, it's important. That's why you know most uh Buddhist do you know most genuine I could say genuine spiritual practitioners do not focus on wealth and fame. uh because you know attachment to wealth and attachment to fame has two problems right first when your attachment increase then it's difficult to leverate yourself second when your attachment to wealth and fame your jealous will grow tremendously jealous can make your mind uh tighter and tighter. Jealous can even even turn your family and friends into your enemies. That's why it says recognizing that worldly fortune has no essence for dharma practitioners. Okay. It's because first of all, worldly fortune is impermanent, right? And second of all, it is the main source of attachment and dissatisfaction. So when you have worldly fortune it's difficult to develop your spiritual practice such as renunciation bodhicitta renunciation of bodhicitta are the foundation of hayana and mahayana Buddhist practice instead of worldly wealth. Um the true wealth the the Buddhism the Mahayana teach wealth is bodhicitta. So the richest so the richest people in the world are bodhic sappas. They have everything let me tell you they have satisfaction. They have compassion, a kind heart, patient, wisdom and because of all these qualities they have they have they have space for all the negative things we discussed above and they can accept everything both positive negative and They respond only positively, very kindly because of their bodhicitta mind. But for those who are not practitioners, of course, worldly sex is important. Don't misunderstand. Now the next 20th verse, it says, This is important. If you have not tamed the enemy of your own anger, the more you defeat the outer enemies, the more they will increase. class with the army of love and compassion subduing your own mind is the practice of bodhi satta beautiful this I like this one that means if we have not subdued in the inner enemy of anger hajjet then external enemies will only increase teachers say you know uh if you kill if you kill out of anger your enemies will be never ending. If you kill anger itself that will kill your enemies forever. Keep that in mind. So once we have overcome anger there are no further enemies in the world outside for you. If your anger diminishes then there is no action done in anger. So in Buddhism whenever anger arises in your mind it is seen as one of the most dangerous emotions. So it is necessary to recognize it as an enemy as something that can really harm you and will cause problems with others and lead to tremendous suffering. So even if you win against others, but unresolved anger will continue to harm you and create more enemies in your mind. If you kill one enemy to get rid of that person, right, then more people of that person's side will try to kill you back. Therefore, fighting with external enemies never works. So this verse encourages focusing in in world and taming your anger with the army of loving kindness and compassion. So the real enemy is only one thing that is anger itself. So we cannot allow it to exist in our mind. The antidote to that is love and compassion. When your heart is placed with love and compassion, there will not be enough room for anger. Love and compassion cannot coexist with anger for sure. And when you have anger, hatred, it's just like um just like a sharp thorn in your feet and you are the only victim who suffers. Anger itself is suffering and the one who has anger will naturally generate suffering. Shannadea remember said that if you walk on the ground and it's hurting your feet, you might want to cover all the ground with leather so that you are protected from the suffering of u prickly ground. He said, "Where would you find enough leather to cover the entire surface of the earth?" But if you use leather just around your feet, then it is if the whole ground has been covered. So that's very nice, right? So anger will first anger will make make you suffer then anger you know gradually make the people around dislike you right if you are very angry person nobody wants to be close to you dangerous so this verse suggests That true strength comes from within. When you get angry, the first step is is awareness of the anger as it arise in your mind and observe the anger without judgment. Just observe. Even teachers say you know like even a short pause can create a space between uh the emotions and your reaction. So when uh when you get angry sometimes walk or gentle movement helps your emotion little bit calm down. Sometimes when you get angry, guidance from a teacher or SA member helps you navigate challenging emotions and understand how anger harms you more than others causing mental suffering and damage in your relationship. ships. But we have always regarded the enemy as something outside of ourselves. But this verse says that is a total mystery. So if we do not subdue our anger, we will continue to experience enemies. It doesn't matter if this person makes mistakes or not. We will still find a reason to hate them. Simply it's because there is the angry or the the the the energy of anger inside us. So this verse suggests that if you want to stop having external enemies then you should eliminate your um angry mind. Then all external enemies are eliminated. In this way outer enemies should not be a problem. Even if they are there they would not be able to harm you. So this is the important way to control our anger. Anger is big problem in human being. So the creator of enemies is one's own anger mind. So that's how bodhic sattas look at the people who harm them. Oh, I can't can't get angry. So it's important. Now the next 21st verse is sensual pleasures are like salt water. The more you use them, the more desires you are become. Thus, when something gives rise to attachment, giving it up immediately is the practice of bodhic sattas. This verse deals with uh with t attachment, right? The comparison of u sensor pleasures to salt salt water suggests that attachment to them doesn't lead to satisfaction just as drinking salt water makes you more thirsty. They said that. Is that true? I never drink salty water. The more you drink, the more you drink makes you more thirsty. Is that true? Oh, see you're science. You know, you know that. Okay, then this makes sense. So, drinking salt water makes you more thirsty. So pursuing sensual pleasures increase um craving rather than satisfaction. That's what it means. So if we allow ourselves to give uh and to uh craving, we will never have enough. Never have enough. We will never be happy. That means we never have enough. That means we'll never uh never be happy. So generally speaking, everyone everyone has a different um different tendency to what they're attached to. Some people like to some people like to, you know, like um eat good food but may not care some so much about clothing. Some people like to wear high quality clothing but may not care so much about food. So therefore the food itself does not possess the nature of good taste. You know the tastiness of food depends on individual's habit and and desire. For example, people like people like to eat meat out of their desire for delicious food not because they're hungry but only to satisfies their desire for the taste of meat but eating meat causes many animals to be slaughtered. So therefore this verse suggests we should not be attached to things like food or clothing. If we do not have attachment to them then any food any clothing will be good. So there are two ways of get rid of um um sense object. One is literally to give them up, right? The other is to abandon attachment to them. Which one you want? For example, I give you example. Malaria, right? Malarip you know malaria. Malaripa give up all sense pleasures to meditate in solitude. and his teacher Marba right Marba took sense pleasures onto the path using them as a practice Marba married has a wife he has a son has a um lots of gold you know all that Marba was Malariba's root teacher so Malaria give up everything okay nothing. He owns nothing. Marva owns everything but he knows how to take them onto the path which means Marba give up attachment even though he has all these things Miller give up all things then he doesn't have any attachment to them that's two things right so if we cannot do both of this then We should live a simple life with satisfaction. That's what I try to do cuz this both I can do both cannot do both of these mara and but I can just have a simple life with satisfaction. So it says um when something give rise to attachment giving up it immediately right it says in this verse it doesn't mean giving up food or clothes but give up touchment to them basically find a find contentment within because a because a content mind provides um peace. So here give up means means giving up desire and attachment because um in the long run those are harmful. This doesn't mean that we have to make a make a huge changes immediately. Um it may be easier to start with small changes and gradually sort of increase. By doing so we will know through our own experience that simplicity brings more peace of mind satisfaction. As I said, you know, there is nothing wrong with gathering wealth as long as we are able to transform them into uh conditions for spiritual development. But it it it it often doesn't happen that way. That's why bodhic sattas live very simple life and that is also practice of renunciation. Renunciation is to um to um appreciate what we have, to enjoy without claiming and to realize that this precious human life is is capable of achieving enlightenment and to understand um samsic happiness has the nature of suffering. That's that's a renunciation mind the practice that's why the path is um all about how to how to gain ultimate happiness. I think the problem is we don't understand uh and don't see samsara is the cause of suffering. If we see it make us suffering, then we will do something and get rid of suffering. Like you know when when you are thirsty, you're looking for water. You're not going to give up until you find the water. So if you see attachment to samsaric pleasures develop suffering then you really want to escape it. Just like a thirsty person looks urgently for um water, right? That's the beginning of that's the beginning of renunciation and and ultimately bodhicitta. But the problem is people trying to so hard changing you know jobs and relationships and um thinking you know this time it will bring peace and happiness and um but no matter how much they rearrange their situation the game is still samsara It's like someone It's like someone stuck in a burn house who keeps moving furnitureures around to get more comfortable instead of realizing they need to get out. Right? But we are just within samsara. We try to change these things in here and there. Oh, this time this will make better, make me more happier. But just the the we are in this samsara in we are the your house is burn right. But you think like inside inside the house you you go different places. Okay, maybe this will be better. Just basically your house is burning doesn't matter inside whatever you're doing. So we don't understand that the samsara. So this verse says that you should view all samsaric pleasure as indulging in drinking salty water. See you should find real water when you are thirsty not salty water. When pleasures give rise to attachment, they bind your mind and creating strong desire on external conditions for happiness. So the solution to this attachment is the the instruction give up it immediately. M say um give up it immediately. Uh it's not about rejecting all pleasure but about understanding that the nature of pleasure can lead to more suffering. Okay. Now this completes the section of the text um dealing with uh training in relative bodhic. There were two sections right. First there was the explanation of the main meditation practice of bodhic ja practice of uh exchanging ourselves for others. And then the second there were uh 10 verses dealing with uh uh the the postmeditation practice and how we should work with the various situations. So the basic instruction in those 10 verses was how to deal with circumstances that create disturbing emotions and um the importance of maintaining bodhicitta love and kindness and compassion and practice and patient and post meditation. So that's the summary of all those verses. Okay. So here we finished relative bodhicitta meditation and the next verses are about ultimate bodhicitta meditation. Okay. So I'm going to stop here. We're going to recite the second chapter here and and