The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [3]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nR4FfS8bFeA
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

All right. Good afternoon. Okay. Now we are going to continue on the 37 practice of bodhic sattvas. Um, we are on the second vers and it is this one is attachment to love ones circus like Other hatred towards enemies burns like fire. Ignorance of what to do, what to adopt and what uh uh abandon is like darkness. Giving up your homeland is the practice of bodhic sattas. Do you like that? given up your homeland like me is the practice of bodhicatt. No. Okay. This is what we call second preliminary practice. We had first uh the precious human life. Right? Now this is the second preliminary. It is um eliminating the three poisons. Okay. Attachment, anger and ignorance. Right? As a beginner, it is difficult to apply um the direct sort of antidote to these um strong afflictions. Um so the best solution is at the at the beginners like us beginners stage is uh to avoid the conditions that gives rise uh to these negative afflictions. Right? Um some circumstances allow these emotions to arise in our mind easily. Right? Most people have a great deal of attachment and aversion when they um remain in the area where they were born and grew up. So much tome uh points to such circumstances is the homeland a source of these negative emotions. For that reason he suggest giving up homeland and disturbing places. That is why Buddha left his homeland. You remember that? Many practitioners encounter obstacles in their spiritual journey due to their attachments to their family to their friends. So as a beginner practitioner to avoid situations that give rise to afflictions is the best way to do it. And um overcoming this these these emotions is an important goal of a bodhic satta. Um so I think there are three ways of understanding giving up your homeland. The first is um actually giving up the place where you were born like Buddha, right? Um however, giving up your homeland doesn't always mean that you must abandon where you were born, but you must abandon any place any situation which causes disturbing emotions. That is the um second way. Give up your homeland. Uh you can give up any place that causes you um disturbing emotions and um um hard to practice all these distractions. Uh that's the second and then the last the third and the deeper meaning is to eliminate these emotions from our mind which we can view as the homeland of samsara. So there are three ways you can given up your homeland. Uh now the first line here refers to um emotional attachment. Um when we have a strong feelings of attachment to to loved ones that can disturb our practice a lot. It's like water with the waves crashing one after another with no peace in between. That's what Tommy said here, right? The second line describes the disturbing emotions of hatred towards enemies which can also destroy your spiritual practice. It says it burns like fire. Fire can destroy everything. Right? So it's burns like fire. And the third line here describes the disturbing emotion of ignorance. Our minds easily fall into their habits and confusion. So we don't know what to adopt um and what to abandon when our minds are controlled by ignorance. disturbing emotion and that can destroy our practice. So therefore to is kind of warning us about our homeland, right? Because that can be a source of the disturbing emotions of attachment and anger and ignorance. So you know there are three ways you can understand giving up homeland. Um that's that. And then the third verse given up negative places. Disturbing emotions gradually diminish with no distractions. Virtuous activities naturally increase through clear awareness. Certainty and the dharma arises. Relying on solitude is the practice of body surface. So this this verse describes good reasons for giving up your homeland that was mentioned above. So this verse gives three reasons why uh solitude is in in a appropriate lifestyle of the bodhic sattas. The first reason is disturbing emotions gradually diminish when you avoid negative places. Your mind has the space to calm and that makes it easier to let go of harmful emotions. So practitioners should abandon that place which causes a lot of emotions to arise. Okay, that's the first second reason for seeking solitude is that uh your meditation will naturally increase with no distractions. Distractions can prevent you from uh focusing on positive actions like meditation. Distractions make it hard to engage in positive actions such as practice of meditation. Right? Atisha said um until you have attained stability distractions harm your practice. By stay in solitude you will be able to devote yourself entirely to practicing the dharma. That's the second reason. And then the third reason for heaven solitude is that it allows your awareness to develop and your mind to become clear so that certainty and confidence in the dharma will arise in your mind. Once you have understood the essential point of the teachings and instructions, you will experience no difficult with um practice and your your efforts will bring you joy. And with understanding of the truth of dharma, your mind is free from doubt. hesitations, confusion. So the essence of learn is uh reflection and the essence of reflection is meditation, right? Learn reflecting or concentrating and meditation. Meditating So if you can sort of uh manage to put yourself into a full state of awareness then good actions and positive uh merits accumulations will increase and everything become easier easier. Um this is just an external way of looking at solitude. But what is really important is the solitude of the mind, right? Not necessarily outside solitude of mind. In Buddhism, what we need to overcome is um not adverse place outside but rather an inner mind of negative emotions. So when we can practice in this way all uh problems will gradually sort of u elim diminish. If you leave somewhere where there is um less distraction then you have time to think and reflect. So in your daily life um let's say um choose a few things that you enjoy doing instead of trying to do everything right because this gives you time to observe your mind to reflect on the dharma and to a play it to your mind. So do something that you like to do and then meditate. You know, for example, um you know, eat something you like to eat and then meditate. Go for a walk and then meditate. Read a book then meditate again. So do something you really like then after that meditate a little bit then do something then meditate that's how you like develop your effort your diligence and connect to the dharma your meditation not necessarily okay I meditate more than three times and then I'm done during the day that's fine too but I like you know you do something then meditate you reflect on that what you did. Maybe you did something wrong. Then you understand, oh, I did something wrong. I will not do that again. Meditate, reflect and then do something. Go for a walk and how when you see people, how did you react? Do you react? And maybe reflect on that. Oh, maybe that's not good. I will not do that again. And then meditate. It's really nice. So that's how you bring your meditation you know into your daily life and then it will change your actions activities and become like really nice and positive and um that's how you sort of increase your dharma practice in your daily life. Um so anyway in essence this verse uh encourages a mindful practice and cultivates inner peace, clarity and certainty about the path of wisdom. So as a Mahayana practitioner the purpose of finding a good place is to be able to meditate and generate bodhicitta. That's the essence of this verse. Okay. So I'm kind of like explaining you a little bit not in detail because we don't have time but just give you the point each verse and then um if you want you can make notes. Now the next fourth verse is Legend. Close friends who have been together for a long time will part from each other. Wealth and possessions gain with much effort will be left behind. Consciousness a guest will leave a guest house of the body. Letting go of this life is the practice of bodhic sattas. The first verse of um 37 practice deals with the freedoms and advantages of precious human life. Right? And this fourth verse is about uh impermanence and death. So usually you see like these two verses come one after the other in the um teachings right when you think about precious human life. Oh this is very precious but at the same time it's very impermanent you never know. So we just went after another. Uh but here in between these two verses there are another verse describing the practice of abandoning in negative places. We just talked negative friends rely on solitude right? This is because when you understand the precious human life on a very deeper level then you will decided to make this life meaningful. Right? To do so as a beginner we need to find a good environment that can help our practice increase develop. That's important. That's why to explain once you really understand the precious of this life you don't want to waste any time you want to do something while I have this great opportunity good human being precious human life I want to do something I then that is like your practice but in order to practice I need to find a good place less distractions. That's why he put it between this um the this verse, you know, and uh first and the this is this verse is impermanent. So now this this is the fourth right this is fourth preliminary fourth preliminary practice is giving up the the concerns of this life by reflecting on impermanence and death. So this verse deals with the nature of life which actually is not the way we usually see not the way we usually understand life. So the first line here mentions our relationships. No matter how deep or how long the connection is, the separation is inevitable. It's just a matter of time whether through changing circumstance or death or something happened. Right? So recognizing impermanence encourages us to appreciate the relationship without clinging to them. That's so important. Don't take this like negative way. But if you really understand in deeper level you know I'm talking you know impermanence of life is really um gives you sort of appreciation the you appreciate the relationship with your friends and whatever. Uh and then the second line of this verse mentions wealth and possessions. Right? Again no matter how much uh we attach to our wealth everything is going to separate from us eventually right therefore the best antidote is to be satisfied with what we have right now right if we have little attach ment to things in ordinary life we will have a better life that's very important then the third line mentions death for see most of us here half of our lives are already gone right like myself even if I live let's say up to 80 more than half more than half my life is already gone each day pauses and that brings us near to death each day each minute each second right bring near to death. It's like an an animal being taken down the road to slaughter. Each step it takes brings the animal near to its death. It's like us, you know, it's like that. In fact, no one know when our lives will end. It can be any moment. It can be. So it says our body is like guest house and consciousness is the guest. Letting go of attachment whether to our lives or relationships, wealth or even one's own life is the main part of this practice. completely. So we should understand this the relationships and wealth we have are not the problem. Sounds like this teaching you know our relationship and wealth we have is a problem. It's not that the problem right? The real problem is having attachment to them without satisfaction. That's a problem. So if we are content, satisfied, then our mind is really at peace. Even if we have very little, if we don't have contentment, satisfaction, then no matter how much we have, we will be unhappy. Contentment is teachers say real wealth and happiness. Satisfaction is the real wealth. So if you have satisfaction, you are just millionaire. So we don't need to abandon anything. We don't we only need to let go of attachment to these things. That is what we need to focus on in this verse. When you practice this verse and heaven, satisfaction and contentment is what is important to do cuz it brings happiness, less worry, less stress. People who are very satisfied whatever they have and they always say I'm I'm happy. I'm good. I have everything. Even though they had not much but you know teachers say that if you are attached to these things you are not a true dharma practitioner. If you are attached to your own self interest you don't have bodhicha mind. So anyway, in summary, this teaching encourages us to practice detachment. That's why it says here, letting go of this life is the practice of bodhic satta. Letting go of this life means letting go of attachment and We can. So that it means like practice satisfaction. That is the real wealth and happiness. Believe me, I think you know I can see all my teachers and all these great teachers how they satisfied, how they happy. Now the next fifth verse it says When you associate with evil companions, your three poisons grow stronger. Your activities of what? Hearing, right? Hearing, thinking, and meditating decline. Your loving, kindness, and compassion are destroyed. abandoning such companions is the practice of bodhic sattas. This verse deals with uh connections and associate um associations with bad companions or uh misleading companions. Okay. M told me talking about us the beginners, right? beginners, child we call I call child bodhic sattas, right? beginners. Otherwise, if you are if you are genuine bodhis, so you have real sort of you have nothing but genuine bodhic chhatta, you need to connect with this negative people so that you have capacity to help them. But child body surface, no. Right? So they will change, right? They will take away our body cha mind. So so much to is talking here you know this verse um associate with uh bad compan bad friends or bad people you know so how do we really know who is good and who is bad for us how do we know in some situation ations it's easy to know but in most situation it's not easy to know. So for this reason we should rely on the explanation of these teachings. So what exactly is a bad companion that the first line of this verse says who whoever makes your three poisons grow stronger is a bad companion. Poison harms whoever takes it. Right? In Buddhism, the three major disturbing emotions are attachment, aggression, and ignorance. These are called the three poisons. Three poisons because they are always harmful to us. Always. So here evil companions refers to people who encourage negative behavior. And when being close to someone makes your negative actions increase that person is considered a bad friend. So the you know kadumba masters say that they would not fear walking with a wild elephant. They're not afraid but they would fear keeping the company of bad friends. Why? Because all the wild elephant they're so strong can cause your death right but its negative influence is limited. It cannot harm your future lives. But a bad friend, evil friend harms many of our future lives. And of course, similarly, if we rely on a good friend, who has a kind heart, compassionate, encourages us to practice, then our good qualities will naturally grow. Good qualities, right? Love, compassion, bodhic, jitta, wisdom, all this would grow. So therefore rely on a good friends is really important so important. If you are if you are beginner, if you are advanced, you are not beginner, you then you need to rely on uh not rely on communicate with the negative people and help them bring them into you know um bodhis path all that. But um if we if you are beginner then your company your friend is so important uh because whether you go down up it depends on your friend. Uh-huh. Then the second line deals with um what we as a practitioners need um which are the qualities of hearing, contemplating and meditating on the dharma. Right? These are the methods for um achieving enlightenment. So we need to engage in these three uh in Buddhism they call three knowledge right three knowledge and uh we should only rely on people who can guide us in this way and we should not communicate with evil uh companions who uh influence our energy and shift our focus away from these kind of practice. So therefore it's important to choose spiritual spiritual friends. That's why belong to a sana community is so important. Then the third line deals with negative influence which can destroy our love and kindness and compassion. If you find that you are under the influence of someone who causes you to have less and less love and compassion for others, then you have to recognize that this person is not your good companion. So you have to slowly um dissociate with uh that person. You don't have to abandon you have you don't have to reject completely. uh if you do that you are going to break your bodhisava but you can keep distance from this uh negative people that you can't help them keep that in mind so uh you know sometimes um Um he go to the bar and then drink with um alcoholics you know all this because he want to help. He has a capacity to help them slowly then you know but in order to do that first you have to do exactly what they're doing and then they think oh this is a good friend we can do this this then they believe you and then you can slowly change their mind. Body salva real bodhic salvas do that they have capacity but we don't we don't have we go there and drink and we drink more and more right then it's hard to stop. So if that's the case you have to slowly sort of disconnect like you know with that kind of people. So as long as you don't pick up their bad actions and follow their you know behavior then they can't change you right? No matter who that person is, we should not have um attachment or hatred towards that person. But we should uh use our um brain uh wisdom to think carefully and we should use our eyes to make good observation. Um so we have to kind of like uh avoid being in their company frequently because they influence our you know this fragile mind so easy to change right and um so those people um discourage you or dharma practice and then then doubts enter your mind and slowly your um inspiration goes down. That's why teachers always advise that if you don't wish for suffering you must avoid negative companions. if you don't have capacity to help them. So they always say if you wish for happiness you must rely on good friends, spiritual friends. So we should not enjoy time with negative friends. So the only way to check is whether your love and kindness, your bodhicitta, your compassion increases or decreases through connect with this people, this person you know or whether your three poisons right attachment, anger, ignorance are increasing or uh domination through the contact with this person. So by checking this this this these things you you would know who is good friend who is bad friend right you don't have to you you have to check your practice if your anger your desire or jealous increase because of the connect connection with this person then something is not Right. So for beginner practitioners, it is a very dangerous to company bad friends. Okay. Keep that. My teacher always say this. Um now the next the sixth verse. Oh this is when you rely on spiritual friends. Your mistakes are eliminated. Your positive qualities increase like the vaccin um cherishing spiritual friend even more than your own body. Wow. is the practice of bodhicattas. This verse um advice that we should rely on good friends and we should uh tasure spiritual friends, someone who has a good sort of effect on us. Again the great um teacher Adisha had a few teachers you know and when he um talked about um some of his teachers he just uh joined his you know his palms at his heart but when he talked about S langa you know S langa who's from Indonesia Yeah. Um he cried Adisha and uh then um the Adisha students asked him what's the difference between your teachers? You know some teachers when you talk about some of your teachers you just jo what is different? He said you know Adisha said all my teachers have the same qualities. They all are good teachers. But Sabba his his root teacher um he went to Adisha went to Indonesia to find Sumba. Oh he went through so difficult. Um but eventually fortunately he he found the sumba and um somba is more for him adish sumba is more important because of my bodhic jetta he said I have a bodhic juta mind because of sumba that's why all my teachers they have same qualities they all good teacher but I have bodhicha because sumba so that's why sumba is when he talk about him is he just cry uh [Music] so you know in the in the Buddhism you know in sutras and tantras it talks about all the different qualities of a teacher so many different qualities of teacher but as Bram said the most important One is whether this teacher has bodhicitta or not. So we need to associate with a spiritual friend who has a body cha mind a compassionate then no matter what it will change and uh we can develop our inner qualities with that kind of spiritual Right. So this is the opposite of the um the last verse, right? Last verse don't spend time with bad people. This verse talk about you know like spend find a spirit of good dharma friends and spend time with them as much as you can. So it says cherishing spiritual friends even more than your own body. The most precious thing to us is what? Our own body, right? So that is used as the example here because their influence helps us overcome our own mistakes and faults and and then our love and kindness compassion increase. It says like a vaccin. So we should practice dharma in their company. In this way our practice will increase and by following the bodhic sattva practice we must go through this process. We must follow this teachings of bodhic sattvas in order to uh develop our meditation. We need to find all these um circumstances you know that helps that can help our meditation and develop our bodhicitta. Once you have bodhicitta then no matter what the way you say where you act way whatever everything is positive everything is dharma when you don't have bodhicha then no matter you prostate like 100 100,000 prostations nothing a good exercise but other than other than that nothing there's no merit right okay um take a break here and then next section