The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [11]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LhWASV8f6Z0
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

All right, welcome back. Now the next 37th verse. to dispel the suffering of infinite beings with superior wisdom free from the three concepts dedicating the merit. Accumulated through these effort efforts to enlightenment is the practice of bodhicattas. So the point here is that these 37 points of practice do not come naturally to us. Right? Without without mindfulness and awareness, we will not be able to do this this 37 practices. Um, the nature of of our being tends to manifest in negative actions due to our habits. The only way to transform these habits is to engage in this these 37 practice with effort and diligence. If we succeed in developing our virtuous attitude through practice, what should we do with this virtue? The answer is here to use it to help remove the suffering of all beings. This means that any virtue or any merit we accumulated should always be dedicated to others including of course ourselves. If you share the merit of your practice or positive actions with all beings mentally, right, that merit will last until you according to Mahayana Buddhi teaching uh that merit will last until you reach enlightenment. It's just like uh they say in the sutras they say just like a drop of water that you put into the ocean that will never dry up for as long as the ocean remain. It's also important to dedicate your marriage to the uh the right goal. So your dedication must to to be pure. Uh but um when we have a good motivation then no question your dedication will be very pure. And when we make this dedication, it should be done without any uh clinging to our own personal benefit or um you know and without attachment. That's why it says here with spur your wisdom free free of concepts of the three-fold three-fold purity. Do you understand that the threefold periods of dedication refers to the uh to the absence of inherent existence and three aspects same thing the person the three the it's a three-fold period uh three-fold period the person who dedicates Right. The person who receives the dedication and um dedicated merit um this is called in Mahayana three-fold purity. All are empty of inherent existence. And this understanding is the wisdom that relies emptiness. It is quite difficult to comprehend how to dedicate merit in this way if you are sort of not familiar with practice emptiness. So how then should we as ordinary beings dedicate the merit? We can do it by following and the footsteps of those who have that realization and that is we should start by thinking about all the virtuous things we have done and we should also think about all the virtuous activities of all the Buddhas bodhic sattvas then this is important for us cuz the the first one um free of concept the three-fold period it's really hard for us but this one is uh easy so we think about our virtuous things we have done think about all the Buddhas bodhis activities virtues of that that their virtues then we bring all that together in union so to and then say I will dedicate all them and the same way the Buddhas and Bodhis dedicate their merit that's how should you dedicate merit and then Mahayana Buddhis say if you do that that's almost same as this the dedicate um the three-fold purity you know that's bas based on realization, emptiness and nature mind. If you have no capacity dedicate that way, then we should do the the next the second one. Then that's that's how we should dedicate merit. So we finished the 37 practice of bodhic sattas. Now we have the concluding kind of verses. And first we have how and for whom this text was composed and the purpose in composition this text that is it says it says relying on what is taught in the sutras tantras and the teachings of the great Masters I have composed this 37 bodhic satta practice for the benefit of those who wish to train on the bodhic satta's part. The point of this concluding verse made by uh what do you call is that he did not make up any of these verses. It comes from a pure source. And this pure source comes from two different sources. Okay? The teachings of the Buddha and the commentaries that made by the great masters. The teachings of the Buddha can be as you know divided into the sutras and tantras. Right? The sutras mostly focus on wisdom, compassion and the nature of uh reality and the tantras refers to bajana teachings which often involves special practices like daily you know visualization and mantra restrations right. So also based this teaching on the commentaries of realized the teachers who have walked the path before him. So to write an authentic teaching tradition requires that the author to possess at least one of three uh qualifications. At best the author should have fully realized the na uh the ultimate nature. If not then the author should have been uh blessed by a direct vision of their yam deities. Okay, that's second. And uh at least the author must have thoroughly studied the Buddhist teachings and uh possess perfect knowledge. None of this the the someone who write the teachings whatever none of these three qualities without these three qualities you are not uh your your teaching is not authentic you should not practice this that teaching so much to possessed all this the qualifications. He had immensed you know immense knowledge and was also blessed with uh numerous visions of you know wisdom deities. So this 37 practice of bodhic satta is the most direct and profound mahayana teachings. So Mitome is offering here a very you know practical guide and clear instructions with this 37 practice and also here he is summarizing you know how a bodhic sattva behaves thinks and practices uh in everyday life All right. So this teaching is a summary of the essential points of the sutras, tantras and commentaries. Um those are from Buddhas, bodhic sattvas or great masters. U so it's without any mistakes you can you can trust this teaching. It says for the benefit of those who wish to train on the bodhic sattas. This verse demonstrates his pure motivation which means right his motivation was um an expression of compassion in bodhicitta. He composed this text not out the desire to become a famous or anything else but in order to make the teaching available to practitioners Mayana practitioners who really wish to practice Mayana Buddhism. So this verse summarize the vast number of bodhic sattva practices into a manageable 37 practice to benefit those who have entered the mahayana part to has made the practice easy for everyone to apply. That's why these teachings have been able to help many Buddhist practitioners throughout centuries. So the teachings you must need are teaching that genuinely bring benefit right and inspiration to your practice. So through such teaching you can develop more and more bodhicitta both you know relative and ultimate bodhicitta and then you can go beyond this human being what do you call it let go of this ordinary uh worldly concerns Um and also develop the relative bodhic jeta, the determination to achieve enlightenment in order to be able to benefit all beings. And that will lead to you to ultimate bodhicitta, the realization of the ultimate primordial wisdom, the nature mind. That is Buddhist quote in Latin. So bodhicitta opens door to whatever practice you do so important. Um so that's the how Mito composed this text and his motivation it shows here right now the next verse M showed his sort of humble attitude it says it says because of my poor for intelligence and literary education. Uh out of this text will not delight scholars yet since they are based on sutras and the teachings of the great masters. I think this practice of bodhic sattvas are not mistaken. So in this verse the author was being very hol. You can see that he truly sort of tasures others and is not concerned with his own reputation when you read this history. Even though he was a highly um realized and learned master but you know the great masters never think proudly about what great learn or realizations they possess. Um instead they they hide their experience qualities. He doesn't say these teachings and you know uh instructions are all my ideas right he says all the words of wisdom here come from the Buddhas and you know the great masters the commentaries right and he says here I have a poor intelligence and lack of learn and um you Um he said I don't write things well so I may have made some mistakes but I tried uh my best to rely on my teachers and um the teachings they have given me you know so as far as I understand what I said here without mistakes that's what he said right so studying this teaching and reflecting upon it, meditating upon it and teaching it to others will not take anyone on the wrong path. That's for sure. So this teaching is um trustworthy. Don't think this, you know, don't think this guy has no self-confidence. That was not the case. So we can trust what he said. And um what you read in this text 37 practice bodhic satta um he's showing us the you know activities of bodhic sattva and in this teaching all the Buddhas in bodhic sattvas really all the you know sutras tantras all these teachings are summarized in this teaching. And this is very meaningful and beneficial. So we should definitely not waste our time and as long as you are willing to listen and can put the you know heart of bodhicitta into your practice then you know I will take the responsibility to teach you give you the uh transmissions as I said he wished you know I he said I want to receive this 37 practice bodhic satta at least 100 times that's what he said I don't know how how many times he received but I think a lot because this teaching is the most important the you know great masters consider this teaching includes everything as as Mchi himself said like this teaching is based on the sutras tantras and the best commentaries and the summarized everything Buddhas bodhic sattva's teachings so I'm very happy to have this opportunity to give you this transmission um and in this way I have you know done my responsibility and you can practice the dharma Um in these days you can listen to very important teachings you know online and on the internet and which is very very very helpful. Uh but it's very different from sitting in a room with your spiritual friends and teacher who is speaking sort of poorly. uh English and directly to you and giving teachings to you directly from authentic lineage. Uh it is not easy to have this opportunity believe me it's very precious. Um anyway now the next verse which really sort of he confess any mistakes he may have made and asked forgiveness. It says so it says however it is hard for someone unintelligent like me or he he's talking about himself right and to fathom a great ves of the bodhic sattas activities so I'm asking the forgiveness of holy beings for all my mistakes such as contradictions and irrelevant verses and so forth. God bless. Okay. In this verse was being very humble again, right? This is this is um this is a beautiful and humble sort of statement. You often found at the beginning and and and end of the teaching this humble you know the great masters always say that right um so he's saying that uh the bodhic sattva's um compassionate actions are profound and vast um even though this teaching um relies is on his teachers and the teachings from the Buddhas. Um but he's still it is difficult to understand um for one with small intelligence like himself. So he's basically saying there might be a mistakes such as you know contradiction. Um so it says I'm asking the forgiveness of the holy beings. So this is an act of confession right and pervocation. So he's aware that uh in trying to explain or engage with such deep topics mystics are inevitable. So he sincerely request uh forgiveness from the holy beings which is uh the the Buddhas, bodhicattas, his his teachers. Okay. And then now we have the last verse which is dedication. Okay. It says by virtue of this merit gathered here by the power of the relative in ultimate body may all sentient beings become like the lord of avaloges who is beyond the extremes of sam samsara and nirvana for the benefit of self and others. This was written by Tome a teacher of scripture and logic at rin cave done. So this is beautiful dedication verse with a deep meaning. The generally speaking you know Buddhist text always um end with dedication of merit. Um it reminds practitioners that all the virtues they accumulate through their dharma practice is for the benefit of others. So that's why it says by virtue of this mer gathered here uh this refers to this practice teaching written by so he dedicates whatever merit has been gathered uh and generate uh in composing this text he wishes that all beings may achieve enlightenment and the main aspect operation of this verse is that all beings become equal to uh the p the practice of avalog that's what I say right so it means equal in aalog's limitless compassion and wisdom so wish all beings may achieve level so that they may benefit all beings just as aalog Sh does. So it says by the power of relative and ultimate bodhicitta. So through this teaching wish that we all are able to generate bodhicetta and achieve liberation for the benefit of all beings. So he dedicate all this merit so that all beings develop both relative and uh ultimate bodhicitta. Um so that's very important because in order to use our human life correctly and in order to achieve enlightenment uh within this life we all have to dedicate ourselves to u the genuine practice of the bodhicatta path which is really beautiful part uh no dangerous This is the the best path. I think uh Mahayana Hanayana uh path is beautiful but um focus on themselves not so much others and then the bajana is very complicated and mahayana the bodhic sappa path is beautiful and easy and everybody can journey on this path. So dedication dedicate you know all sentient beings uh so that we can um practice together and journey on this Mahayana beautiful path. Um so dedication must be done as part of your practice compassion and care for others. Um so I sincerely wish this teaching will help everyone uh to you know generate bodhicitta. Um even a small amount of practice you do uh brings tremendous benefit because bodhic is so powerful. So when you are going through difficult times reflect on these teachings. Um, choose whichever verse that applies to your experience that day, that situation, and contemplate on it to transform your mind. Um I'm sure we all still far away and um have some challenges and difficult ahead right so at that point that situation then we need this bodhic self practice. So if you practice with a motivation of bodhicitta your action will be beneficial not only for yourself but all living being. So if you practice dharma, you should never give up uh without expectation but never give up from the beginning to the end. As as as Malaripa said, do not hope for any result, but practice sincerely until your death. So everything is now in your hands. You have everything you need to practice. Um as it mentioned before in this text, all the Buddha's teachings are summarized in it. Right? Within your lifetime, you can become a genuine bodhic satta if you really want through this practice. That's that. Um uh now finally I am acknowledging that in hearing these profound teachings uh same thing like Tommy said I don't think he uh made any mistakes but I may have made mistakes for sure perhaps you know I didn't give the teachings you were hoping for or I might have uh spoken in ways that caused you know confusion or uh misunderstanding. Uh you can ask me and we can purify that. But if that happened please forgive me. Um and uh uh thank you for your patience and uh for your listening to this great uh teachings. I'm very confident. One thing is I have a really good transmission. Um not just one time so many time I received this teaching. So um and I am certain that you have uh generated a pure motivation. So I rejoice in your great merit. uh and um uh let us generate profound gratitude uh to our teachers uh to the Buddha's bodhic sattas especially to bodhic satta you know to for this vast and profound teaching Um I'm very grateful we have that this um 37 practice body sata teaching available and and we dedicate it. So may all sentient beings achieve enlightenment in this very lifetime at least generate bodhic jetta. Um I think that's all I want to say and oh another thing I would like to thank you all for sharing your spiritual life and thank you for your support. Um I really have um enjoyed giving this teaching and meditation practice with all of you. So um thank you and I also would like to deeply um thank the the volunteers who have put so much energy into this retreat. And um I also would like to thank um especially those who have worked so hard um taken care of this retreat and uh Bodhija Sanga our board members um thank you Jeremy Rick here Colin Keith Kelly um and uh without you uh this is impossible. Uh so the from the bottom of my heart um thank you so much. Um I also would like to thank Mary really um continue to help. I appreciate and um uh without you it's impossible. It's it's impossible for this uh SA community to exist and to make these teachings available and um um I come from a very distant place right and uh I'm only able to teach the practice of the uh Um the heart of bodhicitta here uh because of you. I mean it just not just saying. So I really from the bottom of my heart I thank you so much and uh um I appreciate all of you coming to this retreat and listen to this um profound teachings that come from real bodhic satta to Um and then also it's it's really I enjoy it and doing this meditation together here and uh you know I hope um your practice I really hope I will I will thank all of you and say some prayers every day. Um I hope your practice continue to grow and uh also bring you a lot of happiness and um meaningful benefit. Anything else? That's all I want to say. And now we're going to dedicate merit um so that uh this teaching meditation everything be beneficial for all sentient beings. So we're going to recite the uh dedication chapter right here right now.