The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [9]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RpTkAYrb-Oc
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Good morning everyone. &gt;&gt; Happy Sunday. &gt;&gt; I hope you are enjoying the time we are spending together here. It's truly precious and fortunate, right? I really I really appreciate your effort and your support of the Buddha Dharma. So I want to say thank you again. Now it's a good time to reflect on the benefit of this retreat and how to continue making the teaching a natural part of uh your everyday life. and constantly studying, meditating, continuously learn about the Buddha Dharma, um doing more short retreats, uh being part of u supported community or SA members and creating um sportive environment. These methods will help you to improve your practice. Buddha Shakimi established teachings and he created um Buddhist community called SA. uh after he passed away his sana continued to keep the dharma teachings and live together as a community and benefit others. So all of us old students and new students need to make as much effort as we can to practice and benefit others. Uh we have uh great opportunity to practice dharma. So remembering Buddha's kindness is a deeply meaningful part of Buddhist practice. Um the Buddha discovered this great path through um undergoing such hardship within six years and then he taught Dharma for 45 years and shared the path to liberation that benefit us. So we need to repay his kindness through our practice, cultivating wisdom, generating bodhicitta, benefiting others. Um that's how we repay uh Buddha's kindness. Uh also offering your practice, offering your daily activities. Um remembering his kindness all the time. All the time. um and supporting the SA who uh carries on the Buddhist teachings so important. Um sometimes I wonder why do we engage with so many uh different kinds of deities both you know peaceful and wrathful instead of only practicing with Buddhist. Um we usually think that different people need different methods uh different protectors whatever you call it dies um it's like um it's like a doctor who uses different medicines for different sort of illnesses. Right. Um that's why people need to different methods, different practices, different deities. But ultimately all deities are manifestation of the Buddha and um expression of the enlanted mind and they're not separate from Buddhist. You always need to remember that you can practice bama sambawa. You can practice you know uh bajollaya you can practice all these peaceful wrathful deities but uh very important to understand and um remember that all they are not separate from Buddhakimi and uh remember all these dies are manifestation of Buddhakimi Um that's then you can practice all different kinds. But this is so important because we have this Buddha Dharma basically Buddha Shakimun he um found this uh um path and give us really um great uh instructions and dharma teachings. So it's just without him um there's no way we can um go through this path right so Buddha provides different methods to guide all beings according to their needs. Um so if you know who the Buddha is and have a strong connection to um um or with him Buddha then he is everything you know um so as a Buddhist practitioner is very important to practice Buddha every day that's why we have this uh blessings practice of Buddhist. I hope you will do that every way every day. Um as your main practice uh and remember his kindness um he is the you know source of all the teachings we have today. Uh so the Buddha uh represents uh fearless compassion and limitless wisdom. Uh his life and uh realizations are the example we follow on the path to enlightenment awakening. So reflecting on his life helps us keep going when the path feels um difficult you know. So you have to remember when you have uh you know um difficult situations how Buddha handle all these situations and he found this path. So practicing him and thinking about him um is not only important but it's a way to uh stay fundamentally grounded in the heart of the dharma. So I just uh of course you know this no matter what you you practice different kinds of um deities and um receive um different kinds of teacher uh teachings and uh empowerments or whatever everything comes from Buddha. uh we have to really deeply understand that and um deeply we have to appreciate and uh remember his kindness. I just want to let you know that you you don't need um empowerments and secret sort of initiations or advanced instructions to practice him. Right? You just need practice the um the treasury of u blessings a practice of Buddha by uh mafuchi it's very common uh practice these days everybody different this Tibet you know we have four traditions they all doesn't matter muchi belong to uh uh the nying tradition but he respect All so therefore these days everyone practice this uh common uh Buddhist you can say you know um his guru yoga or turo blessings so um at least every day nothing else if you don't have time to practice but just remember um without Buddha we don't have this all this amazing profound and vast teaching today. We don't have that. So that's because of him. So there's reason we can uh we have to remember his kindness and make offerings to him. Um study uh his teachings and meditate on bodhicitta with mindfulness. Um help others as much as you can. That's all we need cuz Buddha the he in the sutras he many time he say if you want to repay my kindness you have to practice bodhitta uh and uh uh wisdom so that's his uh you know wishes and uh so we should as a Buddhist practitioner follow Buddha we should do that every single day it's not that difficult that in order to practice the treasury blessings of practice Buddhy. You don't need anything. You don't need empowerment. You don't need nothing. Just um I give you the written transmission. Um so just do that every single day and remember his kindness. um that helps your bodhic chitta grow and uh um and helps you really want to practice more and more uh Buddhist you know teachings just let you know that now I'm going to pick up where I left of uh last class today we start with the 31st verse um it says If you do not examine your mistakes, you may look like a practitioner but not act as one. Thus, always examine your mistakes and abandoning them is practice of bodhic satta. This is so important verse you know right uh this verse you know highlights the importance of selfreflection and the part of bodhic sattva right part of bodhic satta bodhic sattvas always you know investigate themselves and their actions and their motivations and all that. So this verse it says you may look like a practitioner but not act as one. It's really true you know um we we all think we are Buddhist and we are practitioners but um maybe but maybe not. So we have to sort of uh self this selfreflection uh is the you know if you take this journey this bo bodhic sata's path this um this is very important true practice comes from inner transformation and inner experiences right um which requires continues self-examination um in Mahayana Buddhism you know if we don't reflect on mystics we may it says you know like we may appear to be a practitioner but uh will not have the good qualities of uh true bodhic sattvas us. Um, if we look carefully, our actions may not be quite as genuine as they appear to others. Therefore, it is very important to check our motivation. Whatever we do, whatever we say, whatever we think, right? If you read the Buddha's sutras, his teachings like the way he talk, he just talks very mindfully. The way he walks very mindfully, you know, we are just so fast without thinking talk blah blah blah. And then even though we don't have really bad motivations, but sometimes we're not aware of what we are talking then sometimes hurt others. So uh so if we don't um investigate our motivation, motivation is is really important. If you practice bodhicitta so then your motivation is good then everything will be positive that's for sure. So therefore it is very important to check your motivation. um whatever you think, whatever you say. Um so this sort of ongoing process of selfreflection and um correction is essential for progressing on the Mahayana Buddhist path. So we have good intentions but uh you know from time to time uh we may lose it right. So therefore this verse suggest uh we should always examine our practice uh as a bodhic sattva as a bodhic sattva uh taking bodhicatta path. So generally speaking our practice is somewhat uh mixed with um certain amount of dharma and certain amount of nondharma. So it's necessary um that uh we take responsibility for our own mistakes and uh uh work with them through you know examination. Um uh great master ata said do not find the fault with others find the faults in yourself and remove them or change them. Um it's it's very important for uh Mahayana practitioners as Gamba said um to hold profound instructions but not transform yourself is a hidden fault of practitioners. So by examining your thoughts uh words and actions uh you can recognize you know harmful habits. Um if we don't go through this constant check and process then it is possible to uh act in a nonspiritual way. Um so you know true practitioners don't ignore their faults but always try to um work on them. Uh the bodhic sattvas always always look into themselves instead of looking at others. So this verse is a sort of a warning to all practitioners who lack mindfulness or who are um sort of proud about their so-called Mahayana practice. Um and such people uh may you know outwardly appear as genuine practitioners yet inwardly they are filled with harmful intent. So we can see that these days you know everywhere. So Shandwa strongly advised that we should always put effort to recognize our faults rather than focus on the faults of uh others. Uh so if we practice Mahayana Buddhism uh we must live a life of virtue and avoid uh harming others. Uh bring happiness to others and um take care of others uh with respect with with kindness. That's Mahayana practitioner's responsibility work job. Uh so we have to remind ourselves to be more mindful. So important mindfulness is now I can uh see more and more every day. How important be mindful whatever you do say think you know and uh try our best not to harm anyone with actions of our body speech and mind right as a always we have to remember I am a Mahayana Buddhist practitioner so that I need to investigate myself other than you know my teachers always said that you know thinking I am a dharma practitioner doesn't make us one just thinking I am I took refuge vows and I received this and that teachings and I practice regularly so I'm a practitioner maybe true maybe not so you only you know you are genuine dharma practitioner or not so just Insight you know insight nobody knows just you. So you know taking the bodhic sattva vow uh or you know dantic initiations um also does not mean we are dharma practitioner. It does not mean at all our mind has been transformed. Um, dharma practitioners subdue the disturbing emotions uh and negative actions. So we can you know look like a great teacher. That's not difficult to do. Uh it's just a superficial uh external appearance. Right? If someone you know for example a teacher you know who sits on beautiful uh you know high throne it does not mean at all that person is a good teacher or you know um we have this Tibetan we have Turka you know if there is a jealousy competition um and they want to be you respected and feel that they are they are special. It it's unfortunately you know it's it's superficial. So in this um in in in essence this verse uh teaches that genuine pract practice uh involves honesty with ourselves recognizing mistakes through uh examination and then removing them. If you see something is wrong then you have to change it. Um that is practice of bodhic sattas. It says not me said that's right. So you know just just just remember this verse you know if you do not examine your mistakes you may look like a practitioner but not act as one. Thus always examining your mistakes, abandoning them is the practice of bodhisatta. It's um I love this verse. Okay, that's important. Uh now the next 32 32nd verse is uh Um it says under the influence of delusive emotions if you speak of the faults of other bodhic sattvas you yourself will be diminished. Thus not mentioning the faults of those who have entered the Mahayana path is the practice of bodhic satta. This verse deals with um criticism, right? Others on the Mahayana part especially when uh motivated by negative emotions like jealousy, arrogance, selfishness or anger. Um so um speaking negatively about other bodhic sattvas creates negative actions. Adisha said you know if you um displace a novel being which is bodhicattvas right um he said it it is like a death you know. Uh so what we perceive as false and and others is probably from our own delusion. Uh maybe this person is um sort of uh how do hidden bodhic sattva you know we don't really know. We don't really know. Uh Tibetan say that um we would never know where bodhi sattas and thieves are. U so these days you know dharma practitioners are everywhere. A good thing. So we uh as Mahayana practitioners should not be um criticizing anyone. Um he will destroy our own uh faith um and um um realization bodhic jetta and we are the ones who um who lose you know uh so um that's why uh We never know uh where body suffers are you know uh it's uh you know when we speak about the faults of others u the anger uh in our mind will diminish our bodhicitta especially when it comes to uh bodhic sattas from the mahayana tradition their their action their behavior is not easy to understand. You know like um think about uh what um Marba uh do you know Marba right Marba Marba did to Malaripa it's not easy to understand Marba's motivation at that time uh it's not easy to understand his mot I mean at that time like how you know um Marba made me suffer a lot you can't really imagine you know um but we don't know what Marba's motivation so therefore I mean we should make um make a vow how not to use divisive talk to criticize others. So before speaking about someone's faults, my teachers always say, you know, ask yourself, is this true? Am I saying this from my wisdom or my ego under the control of anger? is the is this beneficial or not? If if it's not coming from a pure intention, my teacher said it's best to remain silent because um pausing before speaking allows us to um reconsider whether our words are necessary. Silence can be a very uh powerful practice in itself and helps to break the anger of speaking. So bodhic sattvas use the faults they see in others as mirals you know for uh self-reflection. So there may be situations where um addressing someone's faults seems necessary to prevent harm or help someone correct a misunderstanding. In such cases you know bodhic sattva must act skillfully and act with respect. So usually whenever we talk about um something we start to criticize someone else and by focusing on criticizing others based on negative emotions which lead to uh to misjudgment. So this verse um explained in the context of Mahayana practice uh but it is equally true for nonpractitioners. So in all cases you know it's good to avoid looking for faults of others and not speak about what we think we have we have found. So always Mahayana practitioners think about um ourselves right. So that's that's the key and so that you will not never lose your body. Now the next 33rd It says desire for gain and honor leads to uh arguments right and the decline of the activities of listening uh contemplating and meditating. Thus giving up attachment to the households of friends, relations and uh benefactors is the practice of bodhicattas. This verse deals with the uh dangers of attachment to worldly gain, honor and relationships and emphasizing how they can you know obstruct um genuine spiritual practice. So um give up attachment to people uh who helps us because uh this attachment does not particularly come from the qualities of the person but from our hope for you know wealth, respect or honor. Uh so when we become extremely attached to this kind of uh uh situations this lead to um two problems uh conflict and the declining of our practice. So this attachment uh binds us to worldly concerns and um distract us from our dharma practice and we have less interest in this essential practice. Um if if I'm strongly attached to my reputation and my position and then someone is um disrespectful, it upset me, right? Uh then I will never be able to have a peaceful mind. Um if I have that kind of a strong emotion or attachment uh I would be upset if someone has a better reputation than me then there is a competition comes right that means that means I'm attached to my position and worldly concerns then always I'll be upset I don't have peaceful mind then right so it says here give up attachment to the the households of family friends and sponsors [Music] this does not mean we should simply give up all relationships right rather it means we should give up attachment ment and relationships that could lead nondharma activities. So attachment here refers to claiming to relationships for personal benefit and uh using others for our own ego benefit. Sometimes people act very like holy right when their um what do you call it benefactors are around they are they are good you know good at this things and they put them in a position where they cannot say no um it can certainly happen right so this behavior can be a subtle form of uh manipulation. Um so from a spiritual perspective this behavior is a kind of hypocrisy or ego claiming. So therefore himself said uh another his teaching he said like to feel satisfied with whatever you have that is the ultimate wealth and not to be attached to anything at all that is the ultimate happiness. Bodhi sattas like you know live a life given unconditional love and kindness to all. Yet they do so with nonattachment. So nonattachment and mahayana Buddhism does not mean abandoning. It simply means not having a grasping or clinging um attitude towards anything or anyone. It means living with u contentment. um benefiting all beings equally. So this verse advises renouncing attachment so that our practice remains pure. Right. Um, okay. Now, we're going to stop here.