The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [8]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzNaDk2BYks
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

for the bodhicattva aspirating to the wealth of virtue. Every harm is like a precious tasure. Thus without resentment toward any being cultivating patience is the practice of bodhic sappa. Uh this verse expresses a key principle of patience. Sanskrit uh patience paramea which is one of the six parameas in Mahayana Buddhism. So again body suffers want to develop uh this paramea patience to benefit themselves and all other beings. For bodhic sattas actively involved and practicing um each and every time. Sometime something um goes wrong. It becomes an opportunity for the cultivation of patience rather than viewing an obstacle as a basis for resentment. So important right here it says every harm is like precious tasia not all bodhicat not me for bodhic sattas difficulties are not seen as obstacles but as opportunity to cultivate patience every harm is like precious tasure You see um the natural human response to harm is anger &gt;&gt; or resentment, right? But bodhic surface um seek to transcend this and for them it's like a precious tasure. So if we wish to achieve benefiting ourselves and others, it is absolutely essential that uh we cultivate patience because patience allows us to remain stable and check in responding with uh understanding rather than hatred. Instead of blaming others, bodhic sattas see the deeper causes of suffering. So practice and patience um and the in the face of harm is the transformation of suffering into spiritual growth. So this practice not only benefit ourselves by reducing suffering but also benefit others by bringing peace. So to practice patience, you first have to to start practicing with yourself and then for example, with your parents and then with your friends and so on. The first thing you have to do is I think not to speak but remain quiet, not arguing back and not reacting sort of negatively. Teachers say this is what you you have to do when you get upset. For example, someone hurts you and because of that if you get upset in this way you kind of injure your heart of bodhicitta and as a result the heart of bodhicitta is damaged. So your goal is until you achieve liberation, you must keep your heart of bodhicitta with you at all times, no matter what situation you are in. So you have to treat all um enemies remember which is the anger that harms you as your treasure then your bodhic chhatta will grow stronger and stronger. So, but usually we we don't really know how strongly we practice the dharma. Sometimes we feel we are okay but actually we're not because when someone hurts us we get upset there's no patience. So bodhic sattvas say whenever u crucial time comes you should use that moment as an opportunity to practice dharma patience. Good practitioners should be able to deal with um whatever obstacles arise. Anger and patience are like good opportunity to practice patience when anger arise in your mind. You know anger and patience are like fire and water, right? If you are angry, you're not being patient. If you are not being patient, then you're not behaving like a bodhic sattva. We I mean clearly we can't practice patience with people who are nice and kind. We need people who are not nice. Then we have a chance to practice patience, forgiveness. That is why it says every harm is like a precious tasia. From the Mayan perspective, those who harm you offer the same opportunity for spiritual growth as those who help you. But this is um this is the opposite of how we ordinary beings think, right? teachers say when Adisha came to Tibet, he bought a person with him and this person was very um disagreeable um argumentative you know and Tibetan people complained about him, you know, and actually asked Adisha, you should let him go back. But Adisha explained that this person was very important for his practice of patience. But you should know that patience doesn't mean letting someone do whatever they want. If if if someone is harming others, you should try to stop them. But you do so without being angry at them because you know anger again destroys the the the the the virtue of patience. So anger will destroy um your relationships and so on and impatient people are always frustrated, upset, unhappy with everything. Shanda said harmful beings are everywhere like space. So it is impossible to control all of them. Did I say this morning this but but let this anger mind alone be overcome then all of those are also controlled. So that's uh four fourth parameter. Now the next is Merely for their own sake even make efforts as if putting out a fire on their hand heads developing even more diligence the source of good qualities for the sake of all sake of all beings is the practice of bodhic sattva. This verse uh deals with the the the the perfection of um diligence. Right? The main point of this verse is that bodhic sattas need um tremendous diligence in their practice because the path of bodhic sappa is long, deep, challenging. because it's motivated not just by personal liberation but for all beings that's a deep commitment. So in this verse it mentions shvakas and bartikas they follow the path of personal liberation. Hayana. So they have a lesser motivation of only trying to free themselves from s from samsara. Even with this they still need to practice diligently. It says here you know like fire burns on on their head. fire burns on your head, you would not waste any time, right? You would act immediately to put out the fire on your head. Then how much more must do you practice on the path of bodhic satta? It's deep. It's challenging. It's long as well as religion practice the paramuda. Because when you engage uh in the bodhic sarapath uh you have the great intention of liberating yourself as well as all other beings. So therefore you need even more practice of um diligence. So here a fire on the head symbolizes the urgency of dharma practice. Otherwise you will suffer like fire makes you suffer. Um Shandanda also gives an example. It's like when you have a poisonous snake in your lab, you immediately jump into action because it will kill you. So you should act like this with your dharma practice. So Mahayana bodhicatta path involves a vast intention and profound practice. That's why it says to develop even more diligence, the source of good qualities for the sake of all beings. Since bodhic sattvas carry the responsibility of guiding all beings um their diligence must be even greater than those who seek only personal liberation like hayana teachers say when you see the benefit of happiness through your through your practices then Your diligent naturally comes. We usually think diligence diligence means kind of forcing ourselves to do something right. That's wrong. But here it means joyous effort. Diligence means joyous effort. Joyous effort means having a a happy relaxed mind. So practicing the dharma develops appreciation and an understanding of the preciousness of life. That then inspires self-confidence and an understanding of basic potential. All your wisdom, patience and bodhicitta grow from diligence effort. So diligence is like the domino effect and bring many beneficial things not forcing yourself something that you really don't want to do it. That's not diligence. So in daily life diligence can mean acting selflessly, overcoming laziness and engaging wholeheartedly and compassionate activities. something you really understand deeply and deeper level, diligence will automatically come cuz you really want you just you're just so happy with it. And then but we don't have enough diligence. But that's okay. just keep going as long as you don't give up. So diligence is the most important in Buddhism Mahayan especially Buddhism without um diligence we there is no no way to achieve enlightenment in this lifetime but that's totally fine that's totally fine as I I said this so many times as long as you practice bodhic jetta and investigate your actions, make sure they're positive, then don't worry about um achieving enlightenment in this very lifetime. You know, one thing is Buddhism is I I just recognize that you know these days younger generations they lots of people they don't have a goal you know sometimes achieve that okay I I want I get married I have children I make a lot of money everything but still they feel like dissatisfaction dissatisfied whatever they have and then they kind of lose their what what is the point right there's no goal but good thing is in Buddhism there's this goal what is your goal achieve enlightenment that normal like worldly people don't have this kind of goal this is I think in Buddhism is very special is achieve the enlightenment as your long-term goal if you have enough diligence It's possible you achieve enlightenment in this very lifetime. But if you don't have that kind of diligence then you know practice bodhic all this and then you know eventually so you have a goal so you just don't think oh this life is pointless. What is the point? The point is achieve enlightenment for the sake of other sentient beings. So that's good, right? Okay. Good. And the 29th verse is understanding that disturbing emotions are destroyed by special insight with calm Biden. Cultivating meditative stability that transcends the four formlessly states is the practice of bodhic sattvas. So this paramei meditative concentration. So usually our minds are not really focused on meditation. We are constantly distracted by um non-stop thoughts. and disturbing emotions. So we need this this um you know these two methods you know which is um special insight with Ku Biden. special insight is we call some uh what do we call um vapasha right the wisdom that realizes emptiness and com um calms the mind and provides the clarity necessary for insight to arise. So vapasha can only arise within uh stable shamada practice and the combination of these two great methods can eliminate disturbing emotions. So it says to cultivate meditative stability that transcends the four formlessly states See the four four from states are very very deep concentration and advanced meditative stage in Buddhism. So the first first state is called infinite space. Okay. In this state, meditators experience onepointness of mind. The second state is called infinite consciousness. And this state they focus on inner stillness and deeper concentration without thoughts. They experience only joy and happiness in this state. Then the third state is called nothingness. In this state they focus on the mind and settle into a state where it experience nothing. And the fourth state is called neither perception nor nonperception. So in this state they focus on supreme equinimity and mindfulness. So the mind is neither fully perceiving nor completely absent of per perception. So in in early Buddhist meditation this is the highest meditative observion undisturbed stillness. It's an externally subtle meditative state. But on the bodhic sattva path mahayana meditation is not pursued just for the sake of experience in these uh kind of formless states but it's u ultimately integrated with wisdom with wisdom. Wisdom brings enlightenment. That's why bodhic servas need to go beyond these four state. Even though they are very deep uh level of samadi but they are still within samsara. So therefore bodhic sattvas integrate wisdom. Sometimes they call special insight right wisdom. this kind of wisdom, special insight and make sure that meditation is not just about um calm stillness but also about ultimate realization with wisdom and just deep meditation alone will not diminish um all these uh emotions afflictions. So you must uh unite it with wisdom awareness that relies emptiness and clarity. And uh awareness is an inner wisdom that gives you the ability to see things more clearly. And with uh concentration you are able to stay perfectly focused for as long as you want and your mind will be able to rest, right? And you experience the clarity of mind that comes when it's free from distractions. Now with concentration you can create longer times of awareness so that you can bring your meditation into daily life. Um in the beginning of spiritual practice the most important thing is is is to work with the mind. And the best way to work with the mind is through concentration and wisdom. So through through for example shamata meditation uh you will be able to develop concentration right and relaxation and through vipasha meditation you'll be able to cultivate recognition of ultim ultimate awareness and clarity which is the best qualities of the mind itself. A bodhis ha manifest from profound emptiness inseparable from great compassion. So this it says you know you have to go beyond &gt;&gt; this four formlessly state. Remember I told you right Buddhakimi reached this this level and he did not satisfy it because he's he understood oh I'm still I have this still subtle this emotions I'm still that means I'm in I'm not um achieve enlightenment I'm still in samsara I hope you will be able to one day you can read this sutra is so beautiful. um the Buddha's journey when you read their kind of sutas you just don't care everything you want you want just go and you know leave everything there follow the Buddha it's beautiful but then it comes down when you do it it's difficult [Music] Okay, that's uh parami. Now the next the 30 is it says practicing the five perfections without wisdom cannot attain perfect enlightenment. Thus with skillful means and free from the three concepts cultivating wisdom is the practice of bodhic sattas. So here it says practicing the five perfections without wisdom cannot attain perfect enlightenment. Right? It means until we accomplish this wisdom paramuda, it's impossible to achieve full enlightenment. It's because without wisdom, there's no recognition of the true nature of reality. Shan Dewa also says in the in the his in the wisdom chapter says the Buddha taught this entire system of the five paramudas for the purpose of wisdom. Therefore the wisdom paramata is essential for properly putting into practice the other five paramatas. Right? So without wisdom for example we don't know how to practice generosity without wisdom we don't know how to practice discipline or always without wisdom we always make mistakes so with a lack of wisdom we will be practicing the other paramatas kind of blindly right we're not sure about what we are believing in what we are aiming for and how to achieve it. So Buddha said when lacking lack in knowledge the other five paramatas will be blind. Buddha Shakimi focused on wisdom and he thinks this is the very important because that's why Buddha bu in Buddhism we that I mean the faith devotion is the foundation of your your practice but without wisdom then our faith and devotion is blind. So therefore we must to cultivate this wisdom if we wish to develop um the action bodhicitta without any uh mistakes. Do you remember Buddha said after um six years of uh his practices he said I have discovered a nectar like wisdom realization that is infinite profound and peaceful that's that's what we call enlightenment so wisdom is not just only having a lot of knowledge or being smart. But wisdom is associated with the ability to live a meaningful life. So think about uh the definition of bodhicitta. There are two things. Focus on sentient beings with compassion. Then focus on Perfect enlightenment with wisdom. That's the definition of bodhicitta. So there is a compassion, there is a wisdom. So if either of these is missing, it will not be genuine bodhicitta. So in Buddhism, wisdom and compassion must develop together. which is what we call bodhicetta. And then it says skillful means and free from the three concept. To understand three concept, a bodhic sattva must cultivate both skillful means and wisdom. skillful means are the methods they use when they are practicing the five parameters. Skillful means refers to compassionate action and wisdom make sure those actions are not based on attachment or anger or ignorance. Right? That's skillful means free from the three concepts. Ski skillful means. Right? And then the free from the three concepts. It says here it means for example the first for example generosity paramea for example with with a given right first the emptiness of the giver the one who performs the action. And then second, the emptiness of the receiver, the one who benefits. Right? Then the third, the emptiness of the actor of giving, the actor of itself, act itself. So bodhic sattas need to constantly hold the the view of emptiness of the the three these three concept. They can do this practice with the realization of great wisdom that's free from the three concept. So after developing um a foundation of shamata meditation you can build um the special insight free of this this concept. When a bodhic sattva acts with compassion and with wisdom, their action become truly selfless, right? Selfless and truly pure. So this union of wisdom and compassion leads to perfect liberation. So the main practice of bodhic satta is wisdom and compassion through these six paramatas. So generosity, discipline, patience all with wisdom, compassion then that is how to practice action bodhicitta. Okay, that's the last uh paramata. So this is this the the summary of the the six paramatas generous. These are important. If you practice bodhic chitta this is action bodhicitta. But in order to practice action bodhicitta first you have to practice in um what do you call it? Aspiration bodhicitta right? But you need both relative bodhicitta. So the the six parameas for example generosity is um generosity paramuta is the willingness to give others whatever is needed. It helps to overcome attachment. Discipline is avoiding all of the problems that arise from acting, speaking and thinking harmfully. It helps overcome negative behavior, develop self-control. Patience baramuda is the ability to endure difficulties without getting angry. It helps to keep calm in the face of difficulties. Then diligence is courageous action, joyful action. It helps to overcome feeling of laziness and stops us from giving up. Then then fifth meditative concentration um is a state of mind totally free from mental wandering. It helps to stay focused with relaxation. And then of course the last wisdom paramuda is is the state of mind that understands what is correct what is incorrect. So it helps to overcome ignorance and confusion. That's all six parameters. That's how you practice six parameas. In order to six paramas in practice six paramedas you need again compassion and wisdom. That's all. Thank you very much. Practice experas.