The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [1]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5NMcNAq8oFg
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Now the 37 practice of the bodhic sattva sam offers practical advice for those who really want to practice bodhicitta u in their daily life and want to take the bodhic sattva journey bodhic sattva path. So uh we have a good chance to understand how to practice bodhicitta based on uh this teaching 37 practice. Um so this text has as I said 37 verses and uh each describes a specific practice uh essential for the bodhicatta path. Um so please um um write down something that you really want to practice and put into your practice in daily. Uh you have to write down otherwise you are going to forget. Um so we're going to talk and study all the 37 verses step by step during this retreat. Um uh this is a kind of short text but it covers profound topics. Um and it um contains the essential points um and it um summarize the meaning of um great teachings as the bodhicara avatara. uh it also contains all the topics from the mind train and teachings and all of these are practice of bodhic satza. So we're going through all these uh 37 verses. Uh but um it might be um helpful if I first to give you uh the summary of this teaching. Um that's all my uh always my teachers when they start this teaching they give the summary so that you can keep um in your mind. So it has um three main principles. Uh first cultivating the motivation to follow the bodhicatta path. Second uh engaging in the specific trainings of the bodhic sattva path and third uh integrating those practice into your life. So first few verses emphasize um renouncing worldly attachments. They um encourage practitioners to reflect on the nature of life such as uh you know suffering of samsara, benefits of uh seeking liberation for the sake of all sentient beings. And then the following verses describe the specific practices uh bodhic sattva should cultivate. They explain how to overcome negative emotions and how to use difficult situation including harm caused by others as an opportunities to cultivate the six perfections paramas. Um and then the final verses focus on how to follow the bodhicatta path like uh practicing the union of bodhicitta and emptiness which is the uh heart essence of the bodhicattva journey. So each verse serve as a contemplation to help us uh face our lives more uh how do I say skillfully as well as an instruction from um the mind the instructions for uh meditation. So this teaching is a very um I would say practical guides for anyone who wish to uh develop both uh you know uh relative and ultimate bodhicitta. So I feel extremely fortunate to have received this teaching from both Ken and Kiuno not just once but many many times I memorized this text when I was 11 years old. Uh one time Kiapuno gave us this teaching and said that it is very profound and some of these verses may be difficult to practice right now but uh in he you know encouraged us uh not to lose your motivation or your strength because eventually we will be able to put them into practice. And he also said that we should not consider the dharma as simply trying uh to um receive blessings. Um did not like that. just you uh don't practice but just say prayers that's um not real or genuine dharma practitioners do. So we need to make an effort to practice what we have learned otherwise everything um intellectual. So dharma teachings is something we must uh personally put into action as much as possible and use this great opportunity. So this text summarize the entire bodhic sattva path and offers excellent um py instructions for uh mahayana practice. um it is not only popular in all schools of Tibetan Buddhism but also studied and practiced by Buddhists from many many different uh parts of the world. So this teaching is one of the uh puns favorite teachings and uh um he you know considered most important teaching and Kimu Panzo frequently taught this text at um Langar uh his monastery and also when he visited monasteries different place in Tibet, he would sometimes give the teachings in great detail um other times more sort of concisely and sometimes he given only the oral transmissions he always whenever he um you know visited in Tibet different monasteries he always uh focus on these teachings if he doesn't have time then he gave transmission that or reading transmission um so that's the that's a short introduction of this teaching. Okay. Now you have the text, right? You should uh look at the um the first the text start with a Sanskrit which is right. Um it is another name uh for aalog. Um so what is the reason why he um to um pays homage to a load at the beginning of uh this text. It is because a loadara uh is the uh physical manifestation of compassion of all bodhic sattvas and uh um among the qualities of Buddha the main quality is compassion. Right? So uh [Music] um so uh compassion um is the manifestation of the compassion right so compassion is the most important qualities of Buddha or bodhic sattva Buddha said, you know, whenever there is there is a space, there are sentient beings, right? Wherever sentient beings are, they are negative emotions and unhappiness. Therefore, if we wish for others, including ourselves, to overcome suffering, then compassion is important. And um in the madame Shandanda says compassion is the most important seed of uh enlightenment Buddhahood in the beginning, middle and the end. So there are u three main qualities uh that are possessed by the Buddhas. wisdom, compassion and power, right? Wisdom, compassion and power. That's the uh qualities Buddhas, you know. And augishwara is known as the bodhic sattva embodying the compassion of all Buddhas. So here pay homage to himalog because this text explains that the the the the practice of bodhicattas are based on bodhicitta and compassion. Uh in that sense he is the embodiment of all compassion. Okay that's the why the reason why he pay homage with um what do you call it? uh now the next it says okay I will I will recite Tibetan too because so that you can uh you receive the transmission okay uh by the way told us he really wanted uh study this teaching like receive transmissions from uh different teachers he wished that 100 times in his life I want to receive this teaching hund times from different teachers. I'm not sure he really did that, but he received lots many many times. That's for sure. Right. So, you have this transmission from Okay. And then goes back to um all the way. So, it says in Tibetan laws. You see that all phenomena are beyond coming and going. Yet still you strive solely for the sake of all sentient beings. My precious guru and Lord Aalogit with respect I pay homage forever through the three guess. So this u this verse beautifully captures the profound essence of the Mahayana part which is wisdom and compassion together. You it says you see that all things are beyond common and going. This refers to the realization of the ultimate truth. Um relatively sentient beings exist uh and they are sovereign also exist right they arise and dissolve uh based on cause and conditions but ultimately they all are empty that's why I say yet still you strive solely for the sake of all sentient beings the Word yet still here yet still suggests that uh they can um perceive the relative and ultimate truth at the same time. Um the ability to perceive the two truths uh simultaneously is an enlightened quality. It comes from their recognition of the dharmakaya and nmakaya nature or their realization of uh as a wisdom and compassion. So that's what you call it uh ultimate bodhicitta relative bodhicitta. So therefore uh to pays homage to uh his precious guru and aalogi. Um as you know in Mahayana Buddhism the guru is the one who uh guides us on the path and um connect us to the dharma. Therefore, gurus are truly precious. Um, whatever small realization we have gained through practice is due to the kindness of our gurus and for that reason to here pays homage to them. Um, Gamba says, um, it's like traveling through an unfamiliar and kind of dangerous place. Uh, in such situation, we need someone to guide us along the path and help us um reach our destination, right? Otherwise it's dangerous right that's why it says here with respect I pay homage forever through the three gates way so the root gurus they uh Buddhism in order to practice Buddhism we need a teacher otherwise Buddhism is profound it's vast but it's also really complicated um and so it's we will not uh without gurus uh it's impossible to practice um Buddhism uh without any sort of um uh mistake right so therefore um pays homage to his root guru and so and then he said with with respect I pay homage forever ever through three guests. This reflects a sort of wholehearted expression of um gratitude, right? We offer homage through um uh three gets way meaning body, speech and mind. Um and then also forever, not just in this moment, right? But forever. Um and so three gets with three doors body, speech and mind. Uh like your physical homage um uh includes offering you know prostitutations and uh showing sort of respect uh um so on and verbal homage um uh involves offering like prayers rest recitations recite the mantras so on and then mental homage is um generating your devotion, your faith uh and uh most importantly remembering their kindness. Um so the meaning of this verse is the essence of the bodhic sattva's practice uh the realization of the ultimate nature of reality while uh remaining actively engaged for the benefit of all sentient beings. Okay. So that's the summary of this verse. Um the next verse is the perfect Buddha's source of all happiness and well-being arise through accompilation the genuine dharma since that and depends on knowing how to practice thus I will explain the practice of the bodhic sattvas this verse is the hormas by the the author uh to compose this text and um um a um statement of his intention and in explanation of the reason for the uh for the composition. So this kind of uh commitment is important and it's necessary that once we uh once we have begun uh something uh we should we should actually go through the process of doing it um no matter how difficult it is otherwise we never uh ever you know achieve that goal. Um so the first line of this verse refers to the goal of this teaching which is to achieve liberation. Uh it says source of all happiness and well-being. Okay. Happiness refers to freedom from physical suffering and wellbeing refers to freedom from mental suffering. here. Okay. Um we we we have a great deal of mental suffering, unhappiness and worry, you know. Um so by by relying on the dharma teachings, we can transform our uh situation of physical and mental suffering into genuine um happiness. And to achieve that we must practice dharma. Must practice dharma which refers to the teachings of the Buddha. That's why uh the Buddhas are the source of happiness and wellbe. Um that's what this verse means. Right? However, some people uh might wonder you know in the world in this world there are those who um appreciate Buddhism um and those who do not like Buddhism right um many like non Buddhist um experience suffering many Buddhist practitioners also face unhappiness suffering so it doesn't matter who we are. We suffer half of the time. We are happy half of the time. Because of this, many people, you know, have doubt um whether the source of happiness and well-being truly come comes from practice and dharma. They think even after practice and dharma, I still experience suffering, unhappiness. So what's the difference? Right? Um this um um skepticism arises from uh uh uh my my opinion a misunderstanding of the purpose of dharma. Whether you are a Buddhist practitioner or not, um as long as you are remain um sort of caught in samsara, you will inevitably you know like experience both happiness and and and suffering. Dharma practice doesn't uh immediately uh eliminate all sufferings. uh it takes time to transform the mind. That's why even Buddhist practitioners still face difficulties and you know sufferings. But the the the true purpose of dharma practice is not to um um instantly eliminate all problems but it it is uh transform how we uh perceive and respond to unhappiness. Um with the dharma practice we uh develop the inner strength to face uh challenges without being overwhelmed. Uh without dharma practice unhappiness controls us but with it we learn to control how unhappiness affects us. Um in this way dharma practice makes a profound difference uh not necessarily in the you know outer conditions of life but in how we experience and uh relate to them. It's like um in the sutras say it's like you know imagine two people cut in a storm one know how to navigate it and feels less fear while the other does not. So we need to uh that's kind of you know Buddhist practitioner or non Buddhist practitioner. I think that's the difference. So we need to contemplate in our mind how we can uh cut the root cause of um unhappiness and suffering. Um that's that. And then the second line of this verse uh it says arise through accomplishing the genuine dharma. It shows us the result of practice and dharma and is is proof. Uh if you wish to attain enlightenment um you need to rely upon the dharma teachings. Then where do Buddhas come from? In the very beginning, Buddhas and us like sentient beings were exactly the same both were ordinary beings. But because of their practice of the dharma, they became a Buddhas. Therefore, it says that the perfect Buddhas arise through a completion the genuine dharma. So that means we have a great potential to be enlightened within even this lifetime. If we have enough practice dharma and by following the genuine dharma we can be like those great enlightened beings. So we have reasons to optimistic. The potential is already here. So we have to believe in ourselves. We can do this. So if we want to practice dharma, we need to know how to do it correctly, right? Whether we are engaged in the cultivation of meditation, the recitation of uh mantras and so forth. All these are to be done based on bodhicitta practice and applying the correct methods of practice. Therefore, this text 37 practice of bodhic satta will explain how the the the actual practice is to be done by someone on the path of a bodhic satta. Okay. Like that.