The 37 Practices of the Bodhisattvas [5]
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S2ggouPFCEg
Playlist: https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLaAW1H5vg2nHHpesQGHhUyu-l1Xa56nhf

Thank you. Good morning everyone. How is everyone feeling this morning? Great. I hope you all enjoy your time here and I hope uh some of these teachings are beneficial. Um today we will go through more verses from the 37 practice bodhic satta. But before we do that, take a moment and uh correct your motivation. Now I'm going to pick up where I left last class which is the 13th verse. Right. Okay. Even if someone cut my your head when you do not have the slightest fault out of compassion taken upon yourself the negativities of that person is the practice of bodhicattas. This is an intense verse and powerful. Is this really possible? For most people probably not. But for bodhic sattas, yeah. Yes, it is absolutely possible. Because in Mayana Buddhism, the bodhic sattas are able to cultivate boundless love and uh compassion. So it really depends on how far your compassion stretch extend, right? And how much of your ego you are willing to let go through bodhicetta practice again um kingapuno when I received this teaching he said specifically on this verse you know we don't have capacity to handle this kind of situation at this moment but we should pray that someday in the future we can do it and uh he said someday we will have this capacity. Um this verse deals with the practice of bodhicitta and the situation of um being murdered even when you did nothing wrong. It demonstrates how a bodhic satta reacts to this situation. So it is um it is an example of cultivating the highest level of patience. The highest level of patience, forgiveness and compassion and the mahayana bodhic sappa path. So when a bodhic satta is totally totally free of ego, free of selfishness, they're not attached to their own safety or or reputation. Instead, they focus on the suffering of others. So it says taking upon yourself the negativities of that person. This doesn't mean we can take their negative karma. Um and no one can do that. But we can uh influence others positively by our actions. prayers and compassion um which may inspire them to create good karma so that their negative karma can be purified. So we can help them in ways that uh reduce their suffering and support them in creating better karma otherwise you know no one can take someone's negative karma away from them um according to you know Buddhism so taking upon yourself the negativities of that person here means means transforming your own mind and cultivating uh selflessness and uh it reflects a profound commitment and aspiration to cultivate uh compassion for the suffering of others. So the point here is as Mahayana practitioner uh it encourages patience and forgiveness and is a reminder to meet challenges with compassion rather than hat it. So a bodhic sattva in this situation should not feel anger or hatred but have a feeling of you know sadness that someone could actually do such a thing and in experiencing that sed bodhic satta will uh naturally make a great aspiration for that negative person. So if you get angry in this situation, you don't only lose your body but also you lose your heart of bodhicitta as well. So therefore we need to uh contemplate on this verse in our daily lives so that when we uh face difficult situation it will help us uh to remember uh patience and forgiveness right even though we're not there yet but this verse really um tells us how important to be patient and and forgiveness in this kind of situation even though you're not you're not doing anything wrong but for others you know um ignorance and negative karma so you will understand how important to be patient and compassionate so even though we don't have this kind of capacity at that moment this moment but it will help us if we remember this verse you know this this stanza and it says even if someone cuts off your head when you do not have the slightest fault. So this is exactly what is happening uh for example if you think about uh to animals all the time right the is not exactly talking about only human beings all beings right so if you think about animals don't have The slightest vault, but the sliders cut their hand head and uh fishermen cook fish alive in boiling oil or water or whatever. So exactly it it says even if someone cuts of your head when you do not have the slightest fault then people might think oh that's impossible. It is possible you can see like how exactly this is exactly what happened to animals all the time every day any you know every minutes and hours you know they're doing these things. So from a body surface view such suffering brings compassion not just for the you know uh animals like fish but also for the for example you know fisherman you know someone who is so ignorance no compassion or maybe they have a little bit seed of compassion but they just don't extent. So bodhic sappa they have a compassion. Sometimes I find it difficult to feel uh really compassion for people who harm those animals when uh I watch the videos and you know why why can't do that? them. If you want to kill them, they just kill like they just they just put fish or anything alive. You know this Asian people sometimes they uh eat crabs like alive just put it I'm just it's just unbelievable right so when I see that I have difficult to feel compassion for those people I I have compassion for the animals but uh but bodhic is not like that. Bodhi sapph people than the animals cuz they are so ignorant and create such a you know you see this harmful um this actions you know so but we if you watch videos like that you have difficult to feel compassion for people but if if if you don't have compassion for the person who is harming the animals um it's not good for us because u we are going to lose bodhicitta. So if you don't have compassion then you are kind of angry right. So bodhicitta is the opposite of anger. So when you're angry that means that moment you don't have bodhicitta. And so therefore compassion is a medicine for everyone for our own pain as well as others suffering. So yeah this verse is very um powerful but it's a sometimes if you think of it's even though we don't have this kind of capacity at that moment this moment but it's very very helpful. Now the next 14th verse is even if someone spreads all kinds of unpleasant remarks about you throughout the universe. In return with a love in mind speaking good qualities of that person is the practice of bodhic satta. Again for most people this is another difficult challenge. However, this teaching, you know, suggests that no matter how harsh or unkind someone is towards a bodhic sattva, a bodhic satta responds with kindness. A bodhic satta knows that someone who acts out of anger is suffering themselves. So bodhic satta can learn to respond more skillfully. Bodhic sattas never react with anger towards someone in such a difficult situations. Bodhic sattvas recognize that they are under the power of ignorance, anger, no compassion and so forth. They understand that's why they their compassion is so genuine and strong. So the bodhic servas the the ultimate goal is to help others when they are in difficult situation. That's the that's the ultimate goal. If you are in a good situation you don't need really help right? When we need help when we are in difficult situation and when you are in difficult situation you are always not happy. you react negatively you know but bodhic sattvas have a capacity to handle that. So in our daily life there are always problems, obstacles. We don't like when someone says you know unpleasant words behind us or to our friends or our family. we become angry and it can be challenging. So in this situation before reacting bodhic sattvas what they do is take a moment to reflect and if you know your actions and your intentions are honest then sometimes it is good idea to approach the person and address the issue to clear up misunderstanding. However, if the situation is not worth addressing, then it's better to let it go. So it's a you know therefore bodhic sattas has one part they have they have uh great wisdom so they know how to handle the situation and then the other part they have a genuine compassion whatever they're doing is benefit for this people or beings. So it depends. Sometimes we have to talk when we have this kind of difficult situation and clear up misunderstanding. Sometimes we just uh need to let it go. It depends on the situation. But you know it's uh difficult to handle situations like this because we are so attached to our reputation. So if someone ruins your reputations is a really painful experience. We, you know, usually think anyone who says something nice about us is a wonderful person and we think someone who doesn't like us is a bad person, right? And we say you are not my friend anymore. When someone hurts you, it takes time to process your your your emotions whether it's anger, uh sadness or frustration, it's difficult but uh as a bodhic sattva you know we should understand that we can't control what others say about us. We can't control that. But we can control how we live our life. So what matters most is uh try to live in compassionately not only towards others but also towards yourself towards ourselves. So we should focus on a peaceful sort of inner life. Try not to control what other people say about us cuz we can't control that. But if we if we do do things good and react like positively, compassionate, then people say nice things about us. Anyway, uh now now the next 15 verse is even if in the midst of a public gathering someone exposes your fault. s and speaks harsh words about you. Still seeing that person as a spiritual teacher and bound with respect is the practice of Buddhis. The difference between the last verse and this verse is in this verse we are dealing with sort of abusive that is right in our face right the situation is in public but the last verse is someone saying bad words and things like that behind our That that's a different not necessarily in public or not necessarily in faith in our face you know but more sort of broadly here it's about harsh sort of verbal abuse exposion what is wrong with you and really saying terrible things that may or may not be True. That's a different so Adisha said you know when you hear unpleasant words regards them as a echo right. So when someone criticize somebody especially in public and this situation almost almost any ordinary person will become angry and they may think that think that since they're in public if they don't replay to this situation everyone will assume it is true, right? But bodhic sattas regard this as a great taste of their ability to subdue their ego. Bodhic sattas deal with this situation by thinking that maybe what they saying could be true. I can't see it for myself because of my ego, my selfishness. So this moment is seen as opportunity to investigate themselves and find out the truth. So when someone sort of uses unpleasant speech towards us and if we are able to remain calm and handle it well even though it is it is painful. It would be really good for us because it develops our bodhic chitta teacher say it's just like um after having an operation the pain from the sickness is completely removed. It's difficult at that moment but it's good for us afterwards. So this practice is not about allowing others to mistreat you but rather about an opportunity for inner development bodhic jetta and it reflects a deep commitment to maintaining a compassionate mind. But it's again it's really difficult by not re reacting with anger and by cultivating patience which is a key uh practice on the bodhicatta path. Therefore, it says here we should consider that person as a spiritual teacher in in in the west they can't say they can't do that but in like in Tibet you know spiritual the teachers say the student don't do that this is wrong this is your fault this is not they say like that right so uh when somebody say in front of us this kind of critic you know then bodhic sattvas considered this person as their spiritual teacher. So in Mahayana Buddhism, difficult conditions are the best conditions uh to um inspire practitioners to practice the dharma and bodhicetta. Kazimup always said that when you hear this kind of you know unpleasant words try to take them positively and use them as a chance to let go of your own ego. He said, "You know, it might sound strange to you, but it is definitely true." Why? It is because in in in our everyday life if we contemplate on the methods of uh handling our anger one day when the real situation happens we will be able to overcome our anger. practitioners, bodhic sattas always like even though there is no negative or bad you know friends in front of you like that say this nasty things and but they always meditate you know oh this person saying all these things and this verses and they meditate if they say this well how do I handle this and they always you know meditate like that if If we don't practice regularly when we face the real situation, we will not be able to practice patient. We will not not remember bodhicitta and compassion at all when we hear this kind of you know unpleasant words and and we we we get angry like more angry because you know I'm not doing anything wrong. So when you have time, chant these verses and contemplate on their meaning, you know. Um I think that's that's very important. So don't think this practice is not for me. Okay, I'm not there yet and this is too much. This is is I'm not there. This not this practice is not for me. Just forget it. Don't think that. Just just chant you know these verses and then think about the meaning and if this really happened to me what should I do and think about animals this happen all the time what should we do okay now the next 16 16th verse Even if someone whom you cherish as dearly as your own child then treats you as an enemy in return. Like a mother whose child is sick, loving that person even more is the practice of bodhic sattvas. This situation is about someone who is very close to you and then for some reason or without any reason at all that person turns against you, right? Which sometimes happens in our life. If if a stranger does this to you, it's not that hurtful, right? But with someone you deeply love and care about, all of a sudden regards you as an enemy and harms you. It's painful. It's difficult, right? However, as bodhic sat for practitioners, you're not supposed to be upset. So if we act like ordinary people in this kind of situation, what is special about our bodhic practice? Then you know there will be no difference between the person who doesn't know anything about bodhicitta and the person who is supposed to be a bodhic sattva or on the path of bodhic sattva. What is different? So that's why this verse tells us to allow ourselves to feel the hurt and sadness but without anger. So we can practice this in our mind. So it says a mother whose child is sick loving that person even more. It's like a mother whose child is sick and starts attacking the mother who is trying to protect the child. But the mother will not try to harm her child back. Right? Instead, she will have even more love and concern for the child. So in the same way when someone we love turns against us we should not respond with anger that's I mean that's this verses you know but we should we should we should see them as sick with disturbing emotions. So, so much to suggest that we should respond with even more compassion and forgiveness. Forgiveness is about um releasing the burden of anger for our own happiness and peace of mind. forgiving them allows us to free our mind from resentment without holding in onto anger. So it is good for uh uh uh developing our body to the practice as in the um the the the advers on mind training. Do you remember when a person I have benefited and care for deeply hurts me very badly? May I regard them as my supreme teacher? Do you remember? Same thing. So there are many situations which are very similar to what is mentioned in this verse. So these verses speak um of our relationships with someone we love, we care about, but this person views us as an enemy. It could happen. So this situation happens all the time, especially in relationships, right? First, first you deeply love, you care about someone, and then as time goes on, your love slowly turns into jealousy and anger and uncomfortable and, you know, uncatient whatever. And then your trust turns into you know doubt and hesitations and fear. Um then your happiness turns into conflicts. Your um your pleasant time um turns into fighting all the time. That is why in Buddhism practicing detachment for our relationship is important because if you do that none of this will happen. So when I say this um you know you you would think it make makes no sense but but practicing detachment doesn't mean we don't care about each other. Don't misunderstand. It means letting go of all these um high expectations. So this verse tells us, you know, when someone you love regards you as an enemy, you should love that person even more. Again, it's not easy. It takes time. But that is the goal of bodhic sattas. If you consider yourself as a bodhic satta your goal otherwise when you're when you're happy you have everything and you don't have to practice patience why you need patience right so if you are not ordinary person if you if you consider yourself as bodhic sattva this is the goal when you have tough difficult situations then then you will see your real body suffer or not? Not. So you know it says right in Mahayana Buddhism, Mahayana Buddhism is is incredible. It's so beneficial and we as ordinary person we can do this. We can practice Mahayana Buddhism. So in Mahayan Buddhism such challenges can be seen as opportunity to grow your bodhicitta. So when we contemplate and practice in this way our heart of bodhic jitta will definitely increase. So bodhic jitta is the best method to transform suffering into happiness. That's why I'm always focused on how to practice bodhicitta, how to teach bodhicetta, you know. So without uh practice and compassion and bodhicitta, there is no way to get through the bodhic satta path. So we must pay attention to this because it's it's a it's a it's an essential u part of part of practice. Okay. Now the next 17 verse even when someone who is your equal or inferior disparage. Am I right? How do I say this? Okay. you out of arrogance placing that person on the crown of your head put it there with the same respect of your guru is the practice of bodhic sattvas okay this this verse um suggest that when someone who is your um um social equal or even your inferior and position criticize you unfairly or disrespect you out of arrogance or jealousy. You should respond not with anger but with respect. That moment can teach you patience. uh selfawwareness and the ability to let go of your ego. As you know, one of the greatest obstacles on the body sata path is ego, arrogance, selfish, selfishness. In Mayan Buddhist Sata path every experience is seen as an opportunity for growth and chance. Body surface always see that understand that this is a good chance that I can increase my body jettas. So they, you know, seen as an opportunity for change to bring about true change in your mind is is is is hard at first. But if you understand the meaning behind this mind training and keep on trying to apply it, you will find that it helps you in every difficult situation. So these teachings really encourage develop an inner um stability. This helps us m maintain uh clarity in all situations. So the point in this verse is basically to learn not to respond with anger and the result is that you develop patience and bodhicitta. The main point of this verse is uh we should respect uh either someone who is in a higher position, someone who is rich, famous and so on as well as someone who is in a lower position who is poor, not famous and and so on. Both should be equal. That's what this verse, the main point of this verse. Both should be equal. But we usually don't respect them equally, right? If there is a famous person you know in Tiban culture we give them a katas and we want to take pictures with them and but if there is a beggar person poor person who is miserable we don't want to talk with them we even don't want go near them ah it's dirty it smells bad maybe dangerous you So Buddhism you know Buddha said don't respect me. Buddha said but don't respect me more than an other being. So the great Mahayana you know great practitioners tasures mother sentient beings as equal to the Buddha. It's because they have been they have been our mothers in countless lives and they provides us with the opportunities to cultivate bodhicitta and um attain liberation. So for these reasons mother sentient beings are not lower but are equal to the Buddha. So in Mahayana Buddhism we should not have any kind of uh um uh discrimination. We should respect all beings equally. Okay that is the main point and the main you know this verse. Uh keep that in mind. We should not have any kinds of discrimination. We should respect all sentient beings include animals equally. Uh okay. Now we're going to um recite